### The Revitalisation

Though Maytag had borne the banner of the craft revolution all alone, many others worried as well about the problem of protecting local brewers from extinction. If the United States had nearly nothing to lose but Anchor Brewing Company, the Europeans still had plenty.

Is anyone surprised by the fact that the European wing of the revolution was led by the Brits? On March 16, 1971, four young admirers of good ale — Michael Hardman, Graham Lees, Jim Makin, and Bill Mellor — gathered together in Kruger's Bar, Dunquin, Ireland, and founded one of the most influential consumer organizations in history: the Campaign for the Revitalisation of Ale aka CAMRA. (Fortunately, they soon decided to replace the cumbersome ‘revitalisation of ale’ with just ‘real ale,’ provided it makes the same abbreviation but spares a lot of letters. So, ‘CAMRA’ now stands for ‘Campaign for Real Ale.’) CAMRA's goals were set as follows: the preservation and long-term development of real ale (and later — cider and perry as well) and pubs as a part of the cultural heritage of the United Kingdom. Starting the next year, in 1972, the Campaign published its own magazine (‘What's brewing’), and in 1974, its own book (‘The Good Beer Guide’). From 1977 on, the Great British Beer Festival has been a global beer event.

CAMRA's impact on the British (and even global) industry is hard to underestimate. The Campaign instantly became highly popular (five thousand members in just two years), and was soon transformed into a power to be reckoned with. It was CAMRA that pushed the adoption of the so-called *Beer Orders* (formally — ‘Supply of Beer Order 1989’) to break the stranglehold of the industry oligopoly. Six major beer producers (which we described in the previous chapter) unilaterally controlled almost all pubs in the country, thus making it complicated, nigh impossible for the smaller competitors to gain a foothold on local taps.

From CAMRA's point of view, ‘Real Ale’ must be ‘live,’ e.g. contain enough active yeast and sugars to continue fermenting in its storage vessel. Most notable ‘real ales’ are ‘cask’-conditioned (e.g. kept in a small ‘cask’ barrel) at normal atmospheric pressures (e.g. the excess carbon dioxide dissipated): cask ales are considered the true ones[ref](https://camra.org.uk/learn-discover/the-basics/what-is-live-beer/).

#### How to taste

Ideally — go to the UK, find a bar that participates in the Campaign (fortunately, today it's not a problem at all), and have a pint of fresh cask ale. Meanwhile, CAMRA preserves not only beer (and cider, and perry) but also authentic bar interiors. All these cultural treasures (both bars and interiors) are listed in the Good Beer Guide that the Campaign issues (also available in the app)[ref](https://camra.org.uk/about/publications/the-good-beer-guide/).

If you can't make it to the UK, you might try ‘real ale’ in a bottle, as CAMRA also bestows the ‘Champion Beer of Britain’ award. The list of champions might be found [here](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Champion_Beer_of_Britain); let us point out a few of the most auspicious ones:
  * The multi-winner in almost every category, Fuller's with its flagship ‘London Pride’, ‘ESB’, ‘1845’, ‘Vintage Ale’ beers
  * Greene King — ‘Old Speckled Hen’, ‘Abbot Ale’, ‘Olde Suffolk’, ‘IPA’
  * Harviestoun — ‘Old Engine Oil’, ‘Ola Dubh’
  * Adnams — ‘Broadside’, ‘Ghost Ship’, ‘SSB’
  * Orkney — ‘Skull Splitter’, ‘Dark Island’
  * Oackham — ‘Citra’, ‘Green Devil IPA’, ‘Jeffrey Hudson Bitter’
  * Caledonian — ‘Deuchars IPA’, ‘McEwan's India Pale Ale’, ‘John Courage Amber’

  Let us be crystal clear that ‘real ale’ is not a beer style but rather a set of rules on making and storing beers. CAMRA names 12 primary British beer styles, and a lot of sub-styles to each of them — of every taste, color, and aroma.