### American English

It was the beginning of the 70s, and the Anchor Brewing Company's situation remained uncertain. Maytag even managed to get some profit out of his enterprise, but the necessity to expand and modernize the production lines forced him to draw from his savings more and more. In search of additional sources of income, Fritz decided to enrich the beer assortment, and his glance quite logically fell upon another beer style that put down roots deep into American soil: porter. In 1974, the first batch of Anchor Porter was brewed, and in the same year, Maytag came to Great Britain and with some amusement learned the thing that we remembered from the ‘Beer of the Industrial Revolution’ chapter: porter hadn't been produced in its homeland for two decades already[ref:acitelli-audacity:"‘The Most Influential Beer’":](). (Later, Anchor would add pale ale to the roster, as we will tell you in the next chapter, and after that, *barleywine* — two typical English beers).

Meanwhile, the wind of changes was steadily rising in California, and other enthusiasts joined Maytag. In 1976, New Albion Brewery was opened — the first brewery since the Prohibition times (formally, a winery: since the same time homebrewing was still banned in the US). Jack McAuliffe, being deeply impressed by British beers that he had got a taste for during his military service, after getting enthusiastic inspiration at Maytag's Anchor Brewing Company he had visited, was able to convince Susie Stern and Jane Zimmermann to invest in a brewing startup. The three of them created the second craft brewery in the world, located in the town of Sonoma, California — as they couldn't afford San Francisco rent rates.

The New Albion founders considered American beer ‘a national disgrace’: it tasted all the same and, to make production cheaper, the manufacturers weren't squeamish about using preservatives, cheap grain substitutes, stabilizers, and all kinds of recent developments in the field of chemistry. McAuliffe declared his goal was to make *quality* beers equal to the best English ales. And, despite the startup's limited funding forced them to literally build everything from scratch — fermentation tanks were refurbished 200-liters coke syrup barrels, labels were glued to bottles manually with the vintage mechanical device made in 1910, etc. — the startup founders had managed to achieve that goal[ref:acitelli-audacity:"‘Chez McAuliffe’":]().

New Albion Brewery started to make porter as well (and also other English specialties, such as stout and pale ale), thus completing the passing of the baton: while English breweries were stagnating, and famous porters and Burton ales were disappearing, the Americans began rebuilding the tradition.

The years 1975 to 1980 turned out to be the tipping point in the history of craft brewing. Several important events happened in this timeframe:
  * CAMRA organized the first Great British Beer Festival in 1975;
  * New Albion Brewery was opened in 1976;
  * the British beer enthusiast and the first beer historian at the same time, Michael Jackson (not to be confused with a pop singer) on the heels of raising public interest in ales, inspired by CAMRA[ref:zythophile:"Michael Hardman MBE – Mighty Beer Enthusiast"](https://zythophile.co.uk/2008/12/31/michael-hardman-mbe-mighty-beer-enthusiast/), issued the first edition of his famous ‘World Guide to Beer’ in 1977;
  * homebrewing was officially legalized in the US in 1978; the same year, amateur brewers came out of hiding and, thanks to the efforts of Charlie Papazian, the American Homebrewers Association was founded, the homebrewers journal ‘Zymurgy’ and the first recipe almanac ‘Joy of Brewing’ were issued;
  * a year later, the first US-wide competition in homebrewing was held[ref:{"source":{"alias":"hindy-revolution","short":"Hindy, S. (2014)","extra":["The Craft Beer Revolution. How a Band of Microbrewers Is Transforming the World’s Favorite Drink","ISBN 9781137278760"]}}:"2":]();
  * finally, two more craft breweries were opened in California (DeBakker Brewing Company and California Steam) and two more in other states: in Boulder, Colorado (simply named Boulder Brewing Company) and in Albany, New York (William S. Newman Brewing Company)[ref:acitelli-audacity:"‘The Fireman and the Goat Shed’":]().

Education degrees and professional occupations of almost every newly established brewer had nothing to do with beer: McAuliffe, an ex-submarine crewman, was working as an optical engineer; two of the Boulder Brewing founders, David Hummer and Randolf Ware, were astrophysics teachers; Papazian was a school teacher as well; Zimmermann later became a distinguished therapist.

Still, what all of them were offering to the American beer lover? All the same British specialties:
  * Boulder was brewing bitters, stouts, and porters[ref](https://www.craftbeer.com/featured-brewery/this-is-40-boulder-beer); 
  * DeBakker brewed porter[ref](https://brookstonbeerbulletin.com/new-albion-vintage-beer-tasting/);
  * the first issue of the Zymurgy journal featured the recipes of ‘Vagabond Black "gingered" Ale’ and ‘Black Lava Ale’[ref](https://www.homebrewersassociation.org/homebrew-community-culture/zymurgy-magazine-issue-1-throwback-to-1978/);
  * the first National Homebrew Competition bestowed awards in four categories: beers and lagers, ales, stouts, and ‘unusual brews’[ref](https://www.homebrewersassociation.org/homebrew-community-culture/zymurgy-magazine-issue-1-throwback-to-1978/);
  * Bill Newman was producing cask ales in the English manner, buying hops in the UK[ref](https://ediblecapitaldistrict.ediblecommunities.com/drink/bill-newman-godfather-american-craft-brewing).

#### How to taste

Alas, none of the craft startups of the late 70s have survived until today. DeBakker and California Steam were short-living; New Albion was closed in 1982. Despite gaining great authority among homebrewers, McAuliffe, Stern, and Zimmermann were unable to convert it into a sustainable business. However, they made a definitive impact on future craft brewing by vividly demonstrating how a private microbrewery might be founded and launched — without buying a whole factory. More precisely, they *have invented* microbrewing in the modern understanding of the world. Boulder Brewing Company, which even went public in 1980 but declared bankruptcy a decade later (and was re-launched then as Boulder Beer Company), and Wm. S. Newman Brewing Company, which was closed in 1993, held on longer than others.

Still, the American porter remains one of the most popular craft beer styles. Maytag and McAuliffe brought American boldness to the brew: unlike the Brits, the Americans make their porter more complex, aromatic, and even daring, while experimenting a lot with the ingredients and the recipe.

With New Albion, DeBakker, and Boulder versions no longer available, the most interesting challenge is, of course, to find Anchor Porter. Of course, any self-respectful American brewery has one in its portfolio nowadays. The experts value greatly, for example, Everett Porter and Twilight Of The Idols by Hill Farmstead, Maple Bacon Coffee Porter and Last Snow by Funky Buddha, Edmund Fitzgerald by Great Lakes, Black Butte Porter by Deschutes, etc.