### USDA 56013

Until some moment, the craft revolution, though opposed to mass production, still hadn't made anything truly revolutionary: those English-style ales and porters by Anchor, New Albion, Boulder, Newman, and DeBakker were representing the classical styles, maybe with just some peculiarities. At the beginning of the 80s, with the third wave of craft startups coming, the situation began to change.

In the 70s, Anchor Brewing Company was using every occasion to bring attention to its products, and in 1975, such an occasion came very handy: the bi-centennial anniversary of the US independence from Britain. To mark this date, Maytag conceived a plan to brew a special celebration ale; and as Fritz had just visited the Timothy Taylor brewery in West Yorkshire, England, he chose traditional English pale ale as a model (oh, irony!) for his upcoming beer. The first try (the limited batch under the ‘Liberty Ale’ brand) was mediocre and got heavily criticized. Maytag didn't give up and produced a second batch (dubbed as ‘Christmas Ale’) for the Christmas of 1975. Two things were to be abolished: adding sugar to the wort and German hops[ref:steele-ipa:"7":](). In search of Hallertau replacement, Maytag contacted a farmer named John Segal known for his expertise in hops. A fortunate coincidence: Segal was just cultivating an experimental specimen No. 56013, a part of the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) program aimed at developing new crop varieties. The new hops were bred by a group of researchers from Oregon State University, led by Jack Horner, by cross-breeding Fuggle with Russian Serebryanka (and some unknown third variety).

These hops (which soon got their own name: ‘Cascade’, after the Cascade mountains) turned out to be very interesting. First, they were bitter enough to suit Maytag's goal; second, apart from bitterness, they demonstrated a unique grapefruit-citrusy aroma and taste.

Fun Fact. The program to develop experimental hops kicked off back in 1933, but the Cascade was the first variety that saw any real usage.

#### The chemistry of hops

The properties of hops (the taste and the corresponding bitterness) depend on the organic compounds it contains. These compounds might be divided into three groups:
  * alpha acids that got isomerized after heating and give the bitter taste to beer and also provide some anti-septic qualities;
  * beta acids act in the same manner but in the heat got oxidized, not isomerized;
  * essential oils — the various compounds (most notably humulene, caryophyllene, and myrcene) that are responsible for ‘citrusy’, ‘piney’, ‘flowery’ flavors, etc.

Depending on the proportion of those compounds, hops are classified as bittering (typically, boiled with the wort to give bitterness to beer), aromatic (added after boiling and cooling the wort — in a course of so-called ‘dry hopping’), or dual-used (suit both needs)[ref](https://beermaverick.com/types-of-hops-aroma-noble-bittering-dual-purpose/).

Classical European ‘noble’ hops, such as Hallertau and Saaz, contain 4% alpha acids and a bit more (around 5%) beta acids. Kent hops, namely Fuggle and Golding, contain more of the letter but less of the former. The Cascade hops turned out to be richer in all three components[ref](http://www.hopslist.com/)!

| Hop variety | Alpha acids   | Beta acids   | Essential oils, in 100 g   |
|-------------|--------------:|-------------:|-------------------------:|
| Hallertau   | 3,5%          | 3,5-4,5%     | 0,6-1,2 ml |
| Saaz        | 2,5-4,5%      | 4,0-6,0%     | 0,4-0,8 ml |
| Golding     | 5,0-6,0%      | 2,0-3,0%     | 0,9 ml     |
| Fuggle      | 2,4-6,1%      | 2,1-2,8%     | 0,4-0,8 ml |
| **Cascade** | **4,5-8,9%**  | **3,6-7,5%** | **0,8-1,5 ml** |

Christmas ale by Anchor Brewing Company differed strikingly from British ales (and even more so compared to contemporary light lagers). It was quite bitter (around 50 IBU; it was definitely an IPA to the British consumers, and to Americans, accustomed to fivefold less bitter pilsners, it should have tasted like hell) and at the same time aromatic, crisp, and fancy beer.

Initially, the advents and retirements of Christmas Ale (Anchor had been carrying on experimenting, releasing new batches with updated recipes every December) made exactly zero impact on connoisseurs as simply nobody knew about the beer[ref:acitelli-audacity:"‘The Most Influential Beer’":](). New Albion and Boulder (as well as mainstream Coors) were also using Cascade which was ‘trendy’, but nobody remembers that either. It's not enough to just add aromatics hops to wort; one needs to make the beverage fit to encompass all the qualities of the hops.

The general offense of Cascade upon the beer lovers' taste buds happened in 1981 as Ken Grossman and Paul Camusi released the first batch of Sierra Nevada Pale Ale: light, Cascade-hopped, bottle-conditioned. The new ale was a blast: the sales doubled in one year. Two years later, Maytag made his special pale ale a regular brew — and started to sell it under the restored ‘Liberty Ale’ brand.

The success of the Sierra Nevada creation wasn't fortuitous: as Grossman later told, he and Camusi had a clear vision of the highest-quality aromatic ale they were going to make[ref](https://www.foodandwine.com/beer/craft-beer/25-most-important-american-craft-beers-ever-brewed?slide=ff26a990-6ab3-48f6-9cc0-0b7d3ea33e5b#ff26a990-6ab3-48f6-9cc0-0b7d3ea33e5b), and had spent half a year in order to improve the recipe and got the result that had finally satisfied them with the eleventh try[ref:acitelli-audacity:"‘The West Coast Style’":]().

#### How to taste

The beer style inspired by Anchor Christmas/Liberty Ale and Sierra Nevada Pale ale is now known as American Pale Ale (APA). Unlike British pale ales that use hops for bittering, American pale ales must be moderately bitter but utterly aromatic.

Some authors (Mitch Steele in particular) consider Liberty Ale not a true APA but rather an IPA, unlike Sierra Nevada Pale Ale. Though it's rather hard to mark the exact demarcation between the two styles, we can't but stress that both beverages are very similar to each other, both formally (5.9% ABV / 47 IBU versus 5.6% / 38 IBU) and tasting-wise (at least in the author of this book's taste).

Both ‘breakthrough’ beers are being made today. Anchor Liberty Ale enjoys the fame of the first craft beer in history as it marked an important milestone: the incipient craft subculture had for the first time made a totally new product, not a replica of some existing one. Sierra Nevada Pale Ale is less revered, but still is one the highest-selling craft beers in the world.

Apart from those two, we might recommend several other American pale ales made with Cascade: Alpha King by Three Floyds, Pale Ale by Founders, Mirror Pond Pale Ale by Deschutes, etc. In general, many craft breweries make APAs, and Cascade remains one of the most popular hop varieties.

#### …Then they laugh at you

The Sierra Nevada Brewing Company's history at a first glance looks typical for those times: the founders were homebrewers, got impressed by Maytag with his new-old beers, and talked a lot to McAuliffe about how the New Albion Brewery was organized. But they had made one thing differently: they made provisions for future growth.

In the 1970s, no bank or venture investor imagined funding a beer startup. New Albion Brewery, being formally profitable, wasn't able to scrap any money to scale the production, which eventually resulted in the closing of the company. Maytag had to draw from the family budget and spend the inherited savings in order to save Anchor. Sierra Nevada was initially built in a manner that would allow future expansion once the planned production capacity starts generating income. Furthermore, the estimation proved correct, and the Sierra Nevada Brewing Company is worth more than a billion dollars nowadays.

Grossman and Camusi's success had marked a new era in the Craft Revolution history: brewing startups — new wave, rational and ambitious ones — were not just surviving but expanding and increasing outputs. In 1981, the RedHook brewery was opened; in 1983, the Kalamazoo Brewing Company (later renamed into the Bell's Brewery); in 1984, the Boston Beer Company (founder of which, Jim Koch, even had the Harvard MBA!); all of them are functioning today.

In the meantime, relentless Papazian organized the Great American Beer Festival (GABF), which name gives a clear hint of what Campaign was taken as a role model. The first GABF was held in the very same Boulder, Colorado, in 1982: 22 participants demonstrated their products to 850 attendees for 5 hours. Not very impressive, but that was only the beginning. (Also, a year later, GABF started to bestow awards based on visitors' voting. Sierra Nevada Pale Ale got the first prize, while Sierra Nevada and Anchor-made porter got the second and the third ones.)