### The 4 C's

Right after the American interpretation of British pale ale was born, Sierra Nevada Brewing Company made an American IPA as well — stronger, more bitter and more aromatic. The American movement had found its own signature: a love for immensely bitter and fragrant hop beverages. In the 90s, almost every brewery added at least one IPA to their repertoire, and the most innovative ones went much further than this: ‘Belgian <API!--  is it IPA? -->’ emerged (fermented with Belgian yeast strains), then ‘Black IPA’ (made from darker malt), and also ‘double,’ ‘triple,’ and ‘imperial’ India pale ales. In 1999, IPAs  constituted the majority of beers at the Great American Beer Festival (maybe even earlier as we haven't found prior records).

Some researchers tell about the ‘Four C's Revolution’: after Cascade, in the 80s and 90s, Chinook, Columbus, and Centennial hit the market (the latter was even advertised as ‘Super-Cascade’). The proportion of alpha acids and essential oils broke Cascade's record by more than double. But it was still not enough for modern horticulturalists as many new hop varieties demonstrate even more impressive numbers[ref](http://www.hopslist.com).

|<!--  Hop Variety | Alpha acids | Beta acids | Essential oils, in 100 g |
|-------------|------------:|-----------:|-----------:|
| Cascade     | 4,5-8,9%    | 3,6-7,5%   | 0,8-1,5 мл |
| Centennial  | 9,5%-11,5%  | 3,5%-4,5%  | 1,5-2,5 мл |
| Chinook     | 12%-14%     | 3%-4%      | 1,5-2,7 мл |
| Columbus    | 14%-18%     | 4,5%-6%    | 1,5-4,5 мл |
| Citra       | 10%-15%     | 3%-4,5%    | 1,5-3,0 мл |
| Amarillo    | 8%-11%      | 6%-7%      | 1,5-1,9 мл |
| Mosaic      | 11,5%-13,5% | 3,2%-3,9%  | 1,0-1,5 мл |
| Apollo      | 15%-20%     | 5,5%-8%    | 1,5-2,5 мл | -Change all the Percentages- 4,5% to 4.5%, use a period instead of comma: you can do this in one go?->

But it's not only about increasing the alpha acid and essential oil content: soon plant breeders started to search for varieties featuring specific flavors. Depending on exactly which essential oils are dominant, hops will have different aromas:
  * Caryophyllenes give a ‘herbal’ and ‘spicy’ smell and taste.
  * Myrcene — pine, citrus, fruit
  * Farnesene — fresh greens, woody
  * Geraniol — flowers, berries
The list goes on.


Though one might easily create one's own classification, approximately 10 different hop flavors are differentiated[ref](https://beermaverick.com/the-science-behind-identifying-hop-aromas/):

| Flavor              | Example hops                   |
|---------------------|--------------------------------|
| Citrus              | Cascade, Centennial, Amarillo, Citra, Simcoe, Galaxy |
| Tropical fruit      | Mosaic, Idaho 7, Azacca, Citra, Simcoe, El Dorado |
| Stone fruit         | Idaho 7, Eureka |
| Berries             | Nelson Sauvin, Simcoe |
| Floral              | Cascade, Centennial, Ella |
| Resin / Pine        | Centennial, Chinook, Mosaic, Saaz |
| Herbal              | Sabro, Nugget, Columbus, Hallertau, Ekuanot |
| Spice               | Columbus, Chinook, Magnum, Saaz, Hallertau |

Some hop varieties are purposely bred bearing a very specific (and sometimes exotic) aroma in mind. For example, Nelson Sauvin has a ‘vinous’ taste (or more precisely, the taste of Sauvignon Blanc grapes) and Sorachi Ace is like matcha tea. Others were created to encompass an entirely different palette of flavors in one hop cone. Examples include Sabro, Apollo, and Mosaic.

#### How to taste

The most logical and convenient approach to understanding the impact of new hop strains  on beer taste is trying several ‘Single Hop’ beers from one series. This implies the brewery makes several identical beers that differ only in hops. For example, the Mikkeler ‘Single Hop’ series comprises almost a dozen of different kinds of hops. Such sets are also featured by Hill Farmstead (‘Single Hop Pale Ale’), Toppling Goliath (‘Pseudo Sue’), Flying Dog (‘Imperial IPA Single Hop’), De Molen (‘Single Hop’), and Sierra Nevada (‘Single Hop’).