### The Alchemist from Vermont

Beer is a democratic beverage: we have never heard ecstatic stories about the finest harvest of 1967 used to make a single batch of beer, each bottle worth ten thousand euros (but don't let them deceive you: only the barley from the southern slope counts). Yes, there are rare and hard-to-reach beers like Westvleteren or Cantillon; however, first, you might find them for something like 20 euros if you try hard enough, and second, to be frank, craft varieties of the same beers are hardly distinguishable from the originals. In the '80s, it was much more complicated. One needed to travel to Belgium and reach remote monasteries by bike. In every big city in the 21st century, one could get literally everything they want.

That makes the story that happened right before our eyes in the provincial town of Waterbury, Vermont, even more fascinating. In 2003, John and Jen Kimmich opened a small bar named “The Alchemist” with an on-site brewery. For his bar, John made a special IPA he called *Heady Topper*. Brew schedules were irregular — just two times a year, then three times, then four.

The Kimmichs never advertised *Heady Topper* and didn't care about marketing. However, they soon found patrons making lines outside of their bar. Beer lovers from all across the country headed to Vermont to try this beer, spreading the word along the way. Furthermore, some unscrupulous buyers were secretly pouring the beer into bottles to re-sell at an exorbitant price.

In 2011, John convinced Jen to start selling *Heady Topper* in cans and installed a small packaging line. (Ironically, the same week, Tropical Storm Irene washed the pub away.) In the first year, the output increased four times and the next year, another six. In 2013, *Heady Topper* stormed the BeerAdvocate rating, ending the year in fourth place and since then never left the top five.[ref:{"short":"Riches, S. (2017)","extra":["The Story of Heady Topper, America's Most Loved Craft Beer","Longreads and Food & Wine Magazine | March 2017"]}](https://longreads.com/2017/03/01/the-story-of-heady-topper-americas-most-loved-craft-beer/)

What was the alchemy that John Kimmich manifested in this small Vermont pub? He actually did the following: brewed a double IPA with no bittering hops, but for aroma and flavor only. And yes, he had to conjure a lot of magic! For this process, heating wort with hops needs to be at all costs avoided, dry hopping applied multiple times, and special hops selected to balance flavors.

This beer style is now known under many names: Vermont IPA, NE IPA (NE = New England, a Northeastern US region that includes Vermont), East Coast IPA (opposed to the West Coast where the classic California American IPAs originated), DDH IPA (“Double Dry Hopped”); also “hazy” or “juicy” IPA — because of the best examples of the style, including *Heady Topper*, feature a mostly tropical fruit juice aroma. There is (usually) no real juice in the recipe. The “hazy” adjective is the result of the general cloudiness and opaqueness of the drink.

For a long time, classifiers failed to recognize NE IPA as a beer style in its own right. The dam got busted in 2018 when the Great American Beer Festival organizers finally introduced separate “juice or hazy” pale ale categories — which immediately dislodged the traditional IPAs as the most popular beer style by the number of entrants.

#### How to Taste It

Ideally — find the very *Heady Topper* (or another beer in this style from The Alchemist named *Focal Banger*), but that's still quite complicated. Among the US brewers, Hill Farmstead, Tree House, and Trillium are considered experts in making superb Vermont-style ales.

Other beers marked as “NE IPA” shall be treated with a certain degree of incredulity, as many “NE IPA”-marked beers are just regular IPAs, thanks to the immense popularity of the style and the complexity of producing a proper product. The “DDH” mark is usually more reliable, as double dry hopping at least guarantees the rich aroma and flavor. In general, there is no such question as “how to distinguish NE IPA from IPA”: proper NE IPA should be hardly distinguishable in its appearance from orange or pineapple juice.