### Biology and Chemistry

Of all the traditional beer styles of Belgium, *lambic* definitely holds the top spot as the beer possessing the greatest popularity and most longevity. We assume that almost every beer drinking human in the world has at least vaguely heard about this famous beer fermented with unique yeasts that reside only in the Brussels area (or maybe in the Belgian province of *Pajottenland*). At the very least they've tried its cherry *cerise* - *kriek* variety?

Surprisingly, despite its universal acclaim, we know very little about the actual history of this beer nor its origin. Today we use three different words to denote lambic variants:
  * “lambic” itself for the base version
  * “faro” to mark young sweetened lambic
  * “gueuze” (or “geuze”) meaning the blend of unfruited, young and aged lambics

 Historically speaking, all of these terms still denote subtypes of the very same beer as today, but their meaning has changed over centuries. The oldest one is “faro”: it was first mentioned in 1721 as the strongest Brussels beer. In 1794, the word “lambic” occurred as a designation of the strongest and the most expensive *faro*, and in 1829, the even stronger *gueuze* emerged. All those beers were “yellow,” and were brewed using a significant amount of unmalted wheat. (The proportion of which had been steadily declining throughout the 19th century; we might suppose that with the spread of pale malts the necessity of using expensive wheat to clarify the beer had diminished.)

The word “lambic” was initially spelled as *allembique*. So it couldn't have derived from the town of Lembeek (which sometimes refers to a non-existent “province of Lambic” in popular myth). It seems to be borrowed from Arabic (e.g., “al lembic”), being a variation of the word “alembic,” meaning the distillation device. How exactly lambic was connected to alembic is not yet understood fully. Some scholars suppose that strong and clear lambic was thought to be a product of distillation by contemporaries; others say it was some slang word. Both hypotheses, however, are just guesswork as we lack any facts one could possibly rely upon[ref:mulder-lost-beers:"Lambic: the real story"](https://lostbeers.com/lambic-the-real-story/).

Still, why were faro/lambic/gueuze unusually clear and strong beers? As we have learned from the “Barrels and Bretts” chapter, the main practical method of achieving both characteristics was aging of the beer in barrels where it underwent secondary fermentation caused by “wild” yeasts. The technology was well known in 17th-century England, and it had probably reached Belgium in the 18th century.

Beer Myth: It is often said that lambic has been known since at least the 15th century, despite the fact the word first occurred in 1794. Also, it is often quoted that peasants in the Peter Breughel the Elder paintings were drinking lambic — though no actual fact supports this claim.

The Belgians, however, went much further in the adaptation of the production processes than the English brewers. If “bretts” were rather unavoidable in stock beer manufacturing, the lambic brewers were deliberately adjusting recipes to adopt fully spontaneous fermentation — at least as the 1829 and 1834 descriptions fully describe. To achieve this goal, the wort was poured into wide shallow vessels (coolships) and left in the open air exposed to the atmosphere. After that, future lambic was placed in a controlled environment — plainly speaking, into a barrel with a fixed oxygen exposure — and left in fermentation for at least a year. In fact, the production of lambic may be viewed as the process of a controlled spoilage of wort[ref:{"source":{"alias":"guinard-lambic","short":"Guinard, J. (1990)","extra":["Lambic","ISBN 0937381225"]}}:5]().

Scientists tried to study in detail the microbiology of lambic at least twice. The first attempt was made by researchers from the University of Leuven in 1977[ref:{"source":{"alias":"spontaneous-beer-fermentation","short":"Oevelen, D. van, Spaepen M., Timmermans P., Verachtert H. (1977)","extra":["Microbilogocal Aspects of Spontaneous Wort Fermentation in the Production of Lambic and Gueuze"],"href":"https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/j.2050-0416.1977.tb03825.x"}}](). It turned out there were at least four different stages of fermenting, each dominated by different types of microorganisms.

  1. Enterobacteria are first to start consuming dissolved sugars breaking them down into lactic acid, acetic acid, and ethyl alcohol; amino acids — into amines, peptides, myristic and linoleic acids. Enterobacteria dominate the first days of future lambic's life, and then *kloekera apiculata* yeasts join them, which consume glucose and produce the protease enzyme that helps to break down complex proteins.

  2. In two weeks' time, both bacteria and *kloekera* are superseded by regular baker's yeasts. At this stage, normal alcohol fermentation happens: glucose, maltose and maltotriose are converted into ethyl alcohol and different saturated fatty acids such as caprylic and capric ones.

  3. Over the next four months, lactic acid bacteria (mainly of *pediococcus* genus) dominate. They significantly increase acidity by producing lactic acid, acetoin, and diacetyl.

  4. Finally, starting from the ninth month, “bretts” suppress the growth of the remaining microbiota and start slowly but steadily reprocessing everything generated at the previous stages — including lactic, acetic, and other acids — emitting complex esters that are responsible for the unique taste and the aroma of lambic.

And that's not all: apart from the above-mentioned, the addtional yeasts, Pichia, Candida, Hansenula, Cryptococcus genus as well as other microorganisms are making some contribution. To brew a proper lambic, you can't rely on just one particular kind of yeast but a package of specific lambic biota.

In 2014, another group of researchers repeated the experiment. The results were controversial: though the stages remained the same, the specific types of microorganisms dominating each stage were totally different[ref:{"source":{"alias":"spitaels-diversity","short":"Spitaels, F., Wieme, A.D., Janssens, M., Aerts, M., Daniel, H.-M., Van Landschoot, A., De Vuyst, L., Vandamme, P. (2014)","extra":["The Microbial Diversity of Traditional Spontaneously Fermented Lambic Beer","PLOS ONE, April 2014 | Volume 9 | Issue 4 | e95384"],"href":"https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0095384"}}](), which inevitably leads us to the next question.

#### Mixing, mixing…

Taken from the above, it should be obvious that lambic is an extremely complex product to conceive. It is definitely not a Medieval beer but rather an outcome of the stock ale technology evolution, so it's unlikely it emerged before the 18th century. (Usage of just wheat and barley, without oats, spelt, or buckwheat that were a characteristic of earlier Belgian and Dutch beers, actually tells us the same story: lambic was quite a new and advanced beer style.) We should rather ask ourselves: how was it possible to produce such an elaborate product in those primitive conditions without precise measuring tools? How could one deteremine if the fermentation stages in young lambic developed properly?

Certainly, brewers might regulate oxygen exposure thus suppressing or buffering the growth of specific microorganisms. Weather provided some control as well; in particular, the increase of lactic acid's presence corresponds with warm summer months. Of course, the brewers' books from those times contain lots of tips and tricks on how to mitigate undesirable changes; for example, to counter the over-increased acidity, adding eggshells was prescribed, though we might guess its benefits as dubious. Still, one extremely effective tool was available: the blending, or plainly speaking just mixing up different batches of the beverage. Lacambre wrote that the brewer's job was a very difficult one as every barrel of lambic possessed its own unique taste[ref:lacambre:348](). To achieve consistent quality, vast experience (and luck) was required, and few brewers were able to do it well.

The blending of lambics apparently led to changing the meaning of the words. Let us remind you that “faro,” “lambic,” and “gueuze” up until the second half of the 19th century referred to the grades of lambic “elitism”: faro was less strong and aged less, while gueuze was the high-end quality beer matured for 5 years. But why make several versions of the same beer if you can just mix it up? That's how the late-19th century faro was born, as a blend of lambic with young “march” beer with an addition of sugar for continued fermentation.

With gueuze, the story is even more curious. At some moment, the unknown experimenters had applied the *champagnization* technology to lambic — as one might guess, the same one used for making sparkling wines. Namely, young lambic (containing residual sugars) was blended with an aged one and the blend was left maturing in bottles, so carbon dioxide couldn't escape the vessel as it happens with barrels. The result exceeded expectations: the “beer champagne” was not only sparkling, strong, and clear, but also cost a third less than five-year old lambic. So at the turn of the century the word “gueuze” became associated with the new champagne-like blend, and barrel-aged queuze quickly disappeared.

#### How to taste

Lambic is probably the only beer that is nowadays produced exactly as it was made in the 19th century, maybe even the 18th. The Holy Grail for lambic beer acolytes are the lambics made by Brasserie Cantillon. Though founded not so long ago, in 1900, Cantillon (the only operational lambic brewery in Brussels) continues to make beer in accordance with the original artisanal technology, including the proverbial pumping of the wort into coolship to capture the airborne microbiota. It's rather hard to find Cantillon, but that is perhaps the most authentic lambic beer in the world. They don't even use refrigeration and only make beer in proper weather conditions.

Apart from Cantillon, there are several lambic breweries that have equally storied and honorable histories:
  * Their main rival 3 Fonteinen was founded in 1883.
  * Girardin and Oud Beersel known from 1882.
  * Even older, Lindemans Faro and De Troch Lambic (the latter being sold under the brand name “Chapeau”) were first mentioned in the 1820s.

Exclusive of the historical enterprises, today's lambic is made by many contemporary Belgian manufacturers and craft breweries alike.

Pure unblended lambic is rarely sold (though it might be found if one really wants it: Cantillon, 3 Fonteinen, and Boon are selling unmixed lambics), and it's primarily blends that you might find for sale: faro, gueuze, and fruited varieties.