### Spéciale Belge

Apart from the rich history and peculiar legislation, one more factor contributed heavily to Belgian beer heritage: persistence — sometimes even stubbornness! — in preserving the national tradition.

At the end of the 19th century, when the advance of foreign beers and, in particular, German lagers became intimidating (the beer import more than tripled from 1891 to 1903), Belgian citizens hadn't sat on their hands. In 1901, the Union of Belgian Brewers put forth the idea of creating a national beer style that would be able to compete against Munich, Pilsen, and Dortmund lagers (and also British ales). In cooperation with the Belgian brewery schools association, they agreed to conduct a contest in 1904 and announce the winners at the 1905 World Expo that had to be held in Liège.

The organizers took into account the capabilities of the local brewing industry as well as the realities of the time: the new beer was to have an original gravity between 1.045 and 1.05 (which implies around 5% ABV) and cost 15 to 25 centimes per glass. Initially, these requirements were met with extensive criticism as they were quite uncharacteristic in those times (the typical gravity of the end-19th century Belgian beers was much less than that). However, the organizers were resolute in their decision: the new beer must comply with the modern lager and bitter parameters — and history proved they were absolutely right[ref:{"source":{"alias":"steen-speciale","short":"Van den Steen, J. (2016)","extra":["Ale Speciale Belge", "ISBN 9401405867"]}}:15-16]()!

All in all, 73 breweries participated in the contest. The winner was ‘Belge du Faleau’ by Brasserie Binard from Châtelineau, and the style became known as ‘the Belgian special’ (*Spéciale Belge*). It was a light warm-fermented amber beer, made from slightly roasted pale malt. Soon, many other breweries started to imitate the style[ref:{"source":{"alias":"belgian-beers-history-globalization","short":"Persyn, D., Swinnen, J.F.M., Vanormelingen, S. (2010)","extra":["Belgian Beers: Where History meets Globalization","LICOS Discussion Paper No. 271"],"href":"https://www.econstor.eu/handle/10419/74982"}}:5](); however, it became truly popular after the World War I, once the large manufacturers started to produce it: Affligem Brewery in 1925 and Palm Breweries in 1928.

#### How to taste

Today, *Spéciale Belge* is a protected ‘regional product’ designation given to just five beers[ref](https://www.streekproduct.be/weetjes/amberkleurige-speciale-belge-ale-bieren-behoren-tot-onze-rijke-biertraditie). Four of them have been being made for a century or more:

  * Spécial De Ryck and Contreras Tonneke, both in production since 1920;
  * the Belgian special by the Palm Breweries, which is simply marked ‘Palm’ — probably, the most canonical one;
  * famous Bolleke by Brouwerij De Koninck — the iconic beer from Antwerp; being produced since 1925, it was known as just ‘De Koninck’ until the 2019 rebranding (originally, *bolleke* was a brand-name of De Koninck glassware).

The last one is Spéciale De Poes made by the modern brewery Brouwerij De Poes.