### The White Cap

After *dubbel* was created, the Westmalle carried on. The 1920s and 30s were the time Trappists were engaged in close cooperation with civilian brewer specialists, and most notably, with Hendrik Verlinden — a writer and beer expert, who promoted the scientific approach to brewing beer in general and yeast selection in particular. After the First World War ended, yet another wave of pale lager offensive on Belgian soil began, and Verlinden was one of those who sought an alternative. In collaboration with the Westmalle monks, he created a beer style that was later called ‘tripel’ (sometimes spelled as ‘triple’ or ‘trippel’) — a beer based on light abbey ale and elaborated over to increase the alcohol content (typically, around 8%) with the *dubbel* technique of adding *candi sugar* and conducting secondary fermentation in bottles. Like *dubbel*, *tripel* is highly drinkable as it isn't as thick as comparable strong beers like *barlewine* or imperial stout.

Verlinden released his own tripel under the ‘Witcap Pater’ brand in 1932, and that was the only case when the monks allowed a civilian to borrow the ‘Trappist beer’ designation. Westmalle released their version of tripel named ‘Superbier’ a year later, in 1933. In 1956, Superbier was renamed into Tripel, and at the same time the first and only correction of the recipe happened: brother Thomas decided to add more hops to *tripel*. Since that, the Westmalle Tripel recipe has never changed[ref:brew-like-a-monk:71-73]().

#### How to taste

Both original versions of *tripel* are still being produced: Witcap Pater is now being made as ‘Witcap Tripel’ by the Slaghmuylder family brewery and Westmalle Tripel is still being prepared under the Abbey of Our Lady of the Sacred Heart monks' control. Other Trappist breweries are making *tripel* as well: Chimay, La Trappe, and Tre Fontane, though the last one is rather far from the ‘golden standard’ of Brother Thomas'. Also, St. Bernardus, Achel (as Achel 8° Blond), and Cardeña are making it.

Of course, many civilian brewers from Belgium (Duvel Moortgat Maredsous 10, Gouden Carolus Tripel, etc.) and the United States of America (Unibroue La Fin Du Monde, Allagash Curieux, New Belgium Brewing Company Trippel, Samuel Adams New World Tripel, etc.) are producing *tripel* as well.

Also, a very interesting variation of *tripel* under the brand name ‘Tripel Karmeliet’ was introduced in 1996 by Belgian Bosteels brewery (owned by AB InBev). It is claimed that the recipe, dated back to 1679, was found in the Carmelite monastery, and has nothing to do with the Trappist *tripel*. It is, of course, a bit of trickery: though the recipe does exist, and includes the same proportion of barley, wheat, and oats as used in Tripel Karmeliet production, no pale ales or bottle conditioning might have been known in the 17th-century Belgium. But it is still a very interesting (and tasty!) beer.