### The Valley of Gold

Alongside Westmalle and Westvleteren, monks were creating beers in another truly legendary monastery: the Notre-Dame d'Orval Abbey in the Belgian province of Luxembourg. According to a legend, the name ‘Orval’ and the land's coat of arms descend from Queen Mathilda of Tuscany who accidentally dropped her wedding ring in a local spring. As the queen was recently widowed, she grieved the ring's loss greatly and kept praying to God. Suddenly, a trout appeared bearing the ring in its mouth. ‘It's truly *the valley of gold*,’ the gladdened queen exclaimed (‘Val d'Or’ in French), and decided to found a monastery there. In commemoration of this legend, both the monastery's coat of arms and the beer label feature a trout bearing a ring in its mouth.

Throughout almost a thousand years of history, Orval has been a home for the Benedictines (whom came from Calabria in 1070), the Cistercians (that settled there in 1132), and the Trappists as well. The monastery has burned down thrice (in 1252, 1637, and 1793) and remained in seeming endless ruins until finally the land was given to the Trappists in 1926. Soon, the new building was erected — with a brewery, as one might have guessed. The first chief brewer, Martin Pappenheimer, came from Germany, and his assistant, John Vanhuele, from East Flanders (he had also worked a lot in England). Together in 1932, they created a truly miraculous beer. Today we would call it a ‘fusion’ of German, Flemish, and English traditions, enhanced with the latest Westmalle friars' developments. Unlike other beers, Orval claimed neither a legendary origin, nor derivation from some ancient recipe, as such recipes simply do not exist.

The ingredients needed to make Orval comprise five types of malt, *candi sugar*, and classical Styrian Goldings and Hallertau hops. The beer is to be fermented thrice. First, a regular warm fermentation for five days, then, a package of fresh yeasts (a mix of baker's yeasts and *Brettanomyces*) and more hops are added to ferment for another three weeks. Finally, before bottling, more sugar syrup and yeast are added to work for yet another month — which is a clear homage to *saison* (see the ‘March’ chapter), probably introduced by Vanhuele.

What is even more remarkable, it's not the ingredients that define the spirit of Orval — it's the Orval spirit that defines the ingredients. Jean-Marie Rock, brewmaster at Orval for 28 years, told that each year, similar to what Michelin chefs do, he tasted the new harvest's grain samples to select those suited best to recreate *that* taste.

‘Bretts’ (which are, by the way, ‘local’, e.g. gathered in the Orval valley) comprise a small share of the yeast package that is added during secondary and tertiary fermentations, but their effect is long-term. Orval is considered to be fully ready to drink in nine months after bottling, once the *Brettanomyces* have finished their job[ref:brew-like-a-monk:54-55]() (out of the author of this book's experience, that's not enough: it requires several years to fully develop *the Orval taste*).

#### How to taste

The obvious choice is of course Orval itself. However, in recent years it has become notoriously hard to find it. And as for the substitutes… well, it's complicated.

For a long time, Orval was considered just a Belgian strong pale ale despite having little in common with other beers of that kind. The only attempt to replicate the recipe was made by the craft brewers from Mikkeler who released the mockingly-named ‘Årh Hvad?!’ beer (later renamed to ‘Hva Såå?!’); the author of this book testifies that the copy was easily distinguished from the original by look alone, to say nothing of the taste.

Recently, however, a notable amount of ‘Orval-like’ beers emerged, and louder became the voices of those who propose to name Orval a beer style in its own right[ref:{"source":{"alias":"boak-and-bailey","short":"Boak & Bailey's Beer Blog","href":"https://boakandbailey.com/"}}:"Hoover, Google, Orval?"](https://boakandbailey.com/2018/03/hoover-google-orval/) — which we hope will soon happen. There is a special [‘orval-clone’ tag](https://www.ratebeer.com/tag/orval-clone/) on Ratebeer for these beers.