### The Devil for Sale

With the monks working hard for themselves and implicitly for *all* other beer-makers in the world, commercial brewing in Belgium steadily moved forward as well. The Prohibition law and import competition gave it impetus. At the beginning of the 20th century, Belgian beers typically had 2.5% to 4.5% ABV (only *lambic* was stronger, around 6%). Though German and Dutch lagers were also around 3% to 5%, British brews were much stronger, and even more so were their export versions. So it was not surprising that early strong Belgian beers were… British.[ref:{"source":{"alias":"gillman-beer-et-seq","short":"Gillman, G.","extra":"Gary Gillman's Beer et seq.","href":"https://www.beeretseq.com/"}}:"Trappist Ale And English Ale – Connections"](https://www.beeretseq.com/trappist-ale-and-english-ale-connections/)

In 1923 (or 1918, as some sources claim) the Moortgat brewery released its special strong “Victory Ale” to celebrate the end of the First World War. To do so, one of the Moortgat brothers, Albert, went to Scotland searching for proper yeasts (and had found them either at William McEwan”s or William Younger”s brewery — the sources are again inconclusive).[ref:{"short":"Kearney, B. (2021)","extra":["The Duvel”s in the Detail. How a Belgian Golden Strong Ale Became So Iconic","Belgian Smaak"]}](https://www.belgiansmaak.com/the-duvels-in-the-detail-duvel-moortgat/). More importantly, he returned with not only the yeasts, but a recipe as well. In fact, Victory Ale was a Belgian interpretation of the classical Scottish Ale (which was in turn, the Scottish interpretation of the classical English barleywine) and had an impressive 8.5% ABV. So impressive that the local shoemaker named Van De Wouwer reportedly called it “the real devil” (“nen echten Duvel” in the local dialect) With no hesitaion, Moortgats renamed “Victory Ale” — “Duvel.”

Fun Fact. One brewer named Alfred Dubuisson went even further than this. After inheriting the family brewery in Hainaut province, he decided to compete with British beers. In 1933, he prepared a special version of barleywine which weighed in at 12% ABV. He named the brew “Bush” to stress the connection — in fact, he translated his very last name into English!

Both of these new alcoholic exertions were dark (amber in the case of “Bush”) thick barleywines, quite uncharacteristic for Belgium of that period. Likely due to this, they  subsequently held no particular popularity. As the 1960s arrived, changes were brewing. Emile Moortgat, who represented the third generation of the Moortgat family brewers, enlisted Jean De Clerck to assist in the reinvention of Duvel. De Clerck succeeded: he bred pure yeast strains and altered the technological processes of malting and brewing to create a new beer style.  Its strength and aroma are comparable to *tripel* and its lightness and clarity akin to lager. Today this beer style is usually denoted as “Belgian strong pale ale” or “Belgian strong golden ale.”

Making such a strong beer, at the same time so pale and clear, requires intricate knowledge and application of techniques: 
  * Exposure to high temperatures is avoided at all stages, as it results in darker beers.
  * Sugar syrup is replaced with dextrose-based sugar. 
  * Higher attenuation; Duvel is an extraordinarily dry beer.

#### How to taste

Of course, the number one choice is Duvel itself, which may even be found in corner shops. Apart from the original Duvel, one of its first competitors in this style deserves an honorable mention: “Delirium Tremens” by Brouwerij Huyghe (they are also producing one more magnificent strong golden ale under the “La Guillotine” brand).

As the style became popular, many brewers, both traditional and craft, have begun to produce it. Those most critically acclaimed are:

  * “Blonde” by La Chouffe (which was, by the way, bought by the Moortgats at some point)
  * “Gnommegang” by Ommegang (which was — guess what? — also bought by the Moortgats)
  * Gouden Carolus's “Cuvée Van De Keizer Imperial Blond”
  * “Piraat” by Van Steenberge
  * “Stille Nacht” by De Dolle.

The above-mentioned Dubuisson brewery also makes a strong golden ale named “De Charmes.”

#### The wind of change

As Belgian brewing history demonstrates, just making a quality product is not enough — the art of selling it is also essential. At the beginning of the 80s, Belgium was producing a mind-blowing range of beers to suit any taste:

  * *faro*, *lambic*, and *gueuze*, with their cherry and raspberry varieties
  * *dubbel*, *tripel*, and (what they will later call) *quadrupel*
  * Orval and *saison*
  * the Flanders brown
  * strong golden ales, after the Moortgats
  * *witbier*, after Pierre Celis
  * …and regular *pilsner* and pale ales as well.

The changes were brewing not only in Belgium but across the seas as well, in Britain and the United States. Only a spark was needed to start the fire of the craft revolution — the story of which will unfold within the next chapters.