### The Barbarian Booze
##### Historical period: the 2nd — 10th centuries CE
##### Scene of action: Europe north of the Apennines and the Pyrenees

Paradoxically, it was Romans who left a lot of material evidence related to beer production. On the outskirts of the Empire, brewing continued on, both for locals and the Roman legions they hosted — and therefore some administrative correspondence was preserved. Particularly, the letter on a wooden tablet found in the remains of Vindolanda (a Roman outpost in England), in which Masculus, a decurion (head of a cavalry platoon), tells Flavius Cerialis, a prefect, that the soldiers have no beer (*ceruesam*) and asks for reprovisioning.[ref:{"short":"Correspondence of Flavius Cerialis","extra":"Roman Inscriptions of Britain, ab.Vindol. 628"}](https://romaninscriptionsofbritain.org/inscriptions/TabVindol628)

On the territory of modern Germany, Great Britain, and Belgium, a number of Antic breweries were found. One of the oldest is located near Regensburg and dates back to the 1st-2nd centuries CE. It is notable not only for being the first known Roman brewery but also as the earliest evidence of using *kilns* for malting.[ref:nelson-antiquity:163-166]()

Remember that raw barley itself isn't suitable for brewing purposes since its fermentable sugars are inaccessible, so it must undergo a *malting* procedure wherein it is soaked, then allowed to germinate. The result of this operation, known as “green malt,” might be used for immediate brewing, but it perishes very quickly. So green malt is usually dried, and in this form, it might be kept well-preserved for a long time.

In Mesopotamia and Egypt, malt was presumably dried in the sun, since it's quite hot and sunny there. In the Northern European climate, drying malt in the sun was not an option. Alternatively, malt might be wind-dried, but that also requires specific conditions. So in Europe, they started heating germinated grain in large ovens named *kilns*. A kiln was usually a stone chamber with a hearth in it. The malt was spread on the floor, and then the fire was kept low for several days.

#### How to Taste It

How this late Antic beer tasted is very hard to say because no written sources survive. Several Roman writers mentioned beer (most notably, Pliny the Elder in his “Natural History”), but they probably didn't know anything about brewing in detail and were likely uninterested. Technically, the Zosimus recipe we mentioned in the previous chapter falls into this specific time period, but it describes Egyptian technology. As for European beer recipes of late Antiquity and the early Middle Ages, we know almost nothing.[ref:nelson-antiquity:12-17]()

However, the mere fact of early kiln use gives us an opportunity to approximate the taste of the past, so to speak. Nowadays the same technology of smoking malt over beech wood is used to produce a special style of German beer called “Rauchbier” (also, “island” whiskeys). That one aspect aside, Rauchbier is totally inauthentic from all other points of view, as modern barley, yeast, and hops are used to produce it. Yet as you instantly understand after the very first sip, it's a hell of a taste, one may hardly manage to get rid of. So from the tasting perspective, *Rauchbier* is the best approximation of late Antic “barbarian” booze. (Conversely, modern reenactors that restored a Celtic kiln of the 4th-5th centuries CE say that it was naturally a Rauchbier clone they've gotten from it.[ref:{"short":"Stika, H.-P. (2011)","extra":["Early Iron Age and Late Mediaeval malt finds from Germany—attempts at reconstruction of early Celtic brewing and the taste of Celtic beer","Archaeological and Anthropological Sciences, 3(1):41-48"]}:46](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/225682712_Early_Iron_Age_and_Late_Mediaeval_malt_finds_from_Germany-attempts_at_reconstruction_of_early_Celtic_brewing_and_the_taste_of_Celtic_beer))

Widely known beers in this style are produced by the Schlenkerla company (there are several distinct brands, any of them will fit). Also, a few craft breweries produce “smoked” beer: for example, Dutch “De Molen” (“Bloed, Zweet & Tranen” and “Rook & Vuur” beers).

#### The Time of the Cathedrals

A significant part in spreading brewing within Europe was played by Christian monks and priests. Beer “promotion” had already started in the time of the Roman Empire in Ireland, which wasn't under Roman rule. According to legends, in the 5th century CE, Saint Brigid of Ireland was already converting water to beer.[ref:meussdoerffer-history:10]()

Monks' interest in beer was quite understandable in those regions where cultivating grapes wasn't possible. Because of numerous strict fasts, they needed an additional source of calories, unlike the commoners or lay persons.[ref:poelmans-swinnen-economy:4]() Beer popularity in monasteries was additionally promoted by Louis the Pius who started enforcing the so-called “St. Benedicts's Rule” on the territories he controlled, in accordance to the will of his late father, King Charlemagne.[ref:nelson-barbarian-beverage:100-101]() The “Rule” is a set of regulations for monks created in the 6th century CE by Benedict of Nursia. The rule prescribed to monasteries the task of self-sufficiency and therefore producing on-site everything their residents required. Furthermore, monks were obliged to provide meals and shelter for travelers.

It's frequently stated that monasteries produced the largest share of beer in the Early Middle Ages, but it's highly likely not true. Brewing beer was a regular activity for Middle Age households, something quite similar to baking bread. But common people haven't left any written evidence of their everyday life while monasteries were documenting their operations extensively.[ref:{"source":{"alias":"unger-middle-ages","short":"Unger, R. W. (2004)","extra":["Beer in the Middle Ages and the Renaissance","ISBN 0812219996"]}}:27]()

#### How to Brew Beer

Let us describe the technological process of brewing beer as it was developed in Medieval Europe and has reached through to our time almost unchanged.

  1. First, the raw materials (e.g. malt) need to be crushed. The grinding must be rather coarse, not too fine or flour-like.

  2. Ground malt is mixed up with water (the process known as 'mashing') and is heated up to approximately 68-70 degrees Celsius. This temperature is *maintained* for at least one hour. At this temperature, enzymes present in the malt convert starches to sugars. Then the solution is strained and washed out. A pure raw malt liquor called *wort* is prepared. At this stage it is yet sweet, not intoxicating.

  3. If beer is brewed with hops (see the “Word on Hops” chapter) after mashing the wort needs to be boiled down with an addition of hop cones for 1-2 hours. Sometimes wort is boiled longer to achieve a specific taste according to a recipe.

  4. Then the wort is cooled and ready for fermentation. Starter — containing yeast — is added to wort (which could be a portion of actively fermenting beer), or it just gathers the microbiota from the air. Fermentation then begins. Depending on the microorganisms' type and external conditions (like temperature or oxygen access) fermentation lasts from as little as 2-3 days up to several weeks or more. During this time yeasts break down sugars and produce lots of chemical compounds — notably, ethyl alcohol and complex esters. Which substances in which proportions left after fermentation define the taste of beer. Other microorganisms compete with the yeast for edible sugars, first of all, *Pediococcus* and *Lactobacillus*. If they outgrow the yeast, the beer will sour.

  5. Technically, beer is ready for consumption at any moment, though usually brewers wait until the fermentation ends. High-quality beers are usually left to mature for an extended period of time, up to several months or even years.

  6. Some beers continue fermenting in barrels or bottles. To facilitate this process, fresh yeast and/or additional sugar may be added.

At stages 4-6, beer might be additionally spiced with flavor additives, including hops (so-called 'dry hopping').

Up until the 20th century, raw materials could be used several times, e.g. after the first mash was complete and the wort is strained and washed out, the malt remains were mixed with a new portion of water and mashed again and again, up to five times. The first wort was used to produce the best and strongest beer, while secondary worts were used to make cheap and weak “small” or “table” beer.

The most important parameter of wort, directly affecting a beer's strength, is its original gravity. It's usually measured as wort to water density ratio and is denoted with the “OG” abbreviation. The thicker the wort is, the more alcohol the resulting beer contains (approximately 1% ABV per 1% of density, e.g. wort with OG=1.050 might be used to produce 5% ABV beer). Another important parameter is final gravity (FG): not all wort components are fermentable, and fermentation might be incomplete. The higher FG, the more sweet and thick the resulting beer. And vice versa: the closer to 1 the FG is, the fewer non-fermentable compounds remain. The ratio (the share of dissolved organics that were fermented into alcohol) is called *attenuation*. The higher the attenuation, the more effective conversion of sugars (and the lower resulting final gravity).

Fun Fact. The final gravity might be less than 1 because alcohol is lighter in weight than water. To produce such “very dry” beer, either yeast and bacteria should be allowed to consume all the organics in the wort, or (more plausibly) the brew should be chemically filtered.

The easiest way to raise alcohol volume in the beverage is to increase the proportion of sugars. In pre-industrial times, honey or fruits were used. Later, sugar cane syrup or in the case of cheap beer, molasses or other residues of sugar production.

The alcohol produced by yeast acts as a preservative since competing microorganisms do not tolerate its presence. However, the yeast itself can only endure it up to a certain threshold: brewing beer containing more than 8% ABV requires selecting specific alcohol-tolerant yeast strains.