### Bog Myrtle

##### Historical Period: the 10th-14th Centuries CE

##### Scene of Action: The Low Lands and the Northern Parts of Modern-Day Germany

The fall of the Roman Empire entailed lots of consequences, including its implications to beer history. The pressure that “civilized” Romans put on the brewing industry had ended. The new powers of Ireland and Britain as well as the Frankish Merovingian and Carolingian kingdoms were drinking beer with great pleasure. The Anglo-Saxons were using beer as a “currency” for natural exchange; all kinds of duties and wages were paid with it.[ref:nelson-barbarian-beverage:88]()

Medieval suzerains soon began their attempts to control the production of this “currency”, just like any regular state would do in their place. A taxation mechanism was soon found. Emperor Charlemagne proclaimed brewing a state monopoly and started selling it to lords and bishops, who in their turn, monetized their brewing rights by producing beer ingredients and selling them to local brewers. After Charlmagne's death, the Empire weakened, but the monopoly persisted in German and Lowland States.[ref:meussdoerffer-history:11]()

Those ingredients, or rather semi-products, were called *fermentum* in Latin, and *gruit* (*grut*, *grout* and other variants) in local languages. *Fermentum* means “starter,” e.g. some additive that makes bread and beer “rise” (we now know that starters contained yeasts, but in the Middle Ages no one knew that). *Gruit* means “grind,” which seems totally unrelated. Nowadays we use the word *gruit* for a selection of aromatic herbs. This contradiction is resolved easily: medieval gruit could be considered *all of the above.*

Beer spoilage was the brewers' main problem. There were two main ways of avoiding it: increase the alcohol content or add preservatives. Medieval *fermentum*/*gruit* helped with both. The preparation process included grinding the malt, cooking it into a kind of porridge, and evaporating off the liquid. The resulting malt concentrate was either a solid or a paste-like substance depending on whether cereal residues were filtered out or not. This malt porridge could have been used for making pastries, which explains using the *fermentum* and *gruit* words to denote baked goods.[ref:{"short":"Ruis, F. (2016)","extra":["A Note on the Essence of Gruit","Brewery History, 166"]}:52](http://www.breweryhistory.com/journal/archive/166/index.html) Additionally, some flavor additives, mostly herbal, were mixed in.

This malt concentrate was sold to brewers, and it was indeed quite useful. Adding this gruit to the wort would cause yeast to proliferate quickly and produce a large amount of alcohol, thus suppressing the growth of competing microorganisms, which for an observer would look like the gruit indeed leavened the wort. Modern reenactors managed to achieve quite a considerable shelf life for such gruit beer of more than three weeks.[ref:{"source":{"alias":"verberg-blog","short":"Verberg, S.","extra":"Medieval Mead and Beer. Experimental brewing with Medieval flair","href":"https://medievalmeadandbeer.wordpress.com/"}}:"Reconstructing the substance gruit: an experiment"](https://medievalmeadandbeer.wordpress.com/2021/03/29/reconstructing-the-substance-gruit-an-experiment/)

Flavor additives also played a major role. Firstly, they had some antiseptic effects. Secondly, they helped to conceal an unpleasant taste and smell. Thirdly, because of the additive properties themselves, beer was considered healthy and even curative. Different sources mention more than 40 distinct additives and 14 more were added for medicinal reasons[ref:meussdoerffer-history:15](): wild rosemary, yarrow, juniper, sage, ground ivy, anise, caraway, laurel berries, and pine resins were also used. In fact, every town possessed its own unique gruit recipe depending on the local flora. However, there was one particularly vital component: bog myrtle (*Myrica gale*), which was traditionally used as both a sedative and antiseptic compound. In addition, bog myrtle is rather capricious and grows (surprise!) mostly in bogs. As the beer production itself, bog myrtle was a convenient object for the state monopoly.[ref:unger-middle-ages:31-32]()

For medieval suzerains (baronies and bishoprics) and later for city magistrates, gruit was a handy and understandable method of collecting taxes.[ref:unger-middle-ages:49]() Towns were buying the privilege (*gruitrecht*) from their segnors and opening the “gruit houses” (*gruithuis*).[ref:unger-middle-ages:45]() Often, instead of buying gruit in the gruit house, brewers were paying their duties in money. Such a levy was called *gruitgeld* (literally, “gruit gold”).[ref:unger-middle-ages:64]()

However, the significance of centralized starter production was gradually declining. Later records indicate that in the 13th century, gruit houses were purchasing much more herbal products in proportion to malt than needed.[ref:verberg-gruit:55]() Some scholars believe that brewers were bringing malt to the gruit houses to be mashed with gruit there (and therefore the exact recipe was kept a secret).[ref:swinnen-briski-beeronomics:17]() Since nobody cared about writing down such obvious things as gruit usage (just like any other detail regarding brewing), later researchers were convinced that gruit was just a mix of herbs to flavor beer.[ref:{"source":{"alias":"verberg-gruit","short":"Verberg, S. (2018)","extra":["The Rise and Fall of Gruit","Brewery History, 174"],"href":"http://www.breweryhistory.com/journal/archive/174/index.html"}}:50]()

#### Beer in the Middle Ages

Let us stress that beer consumption was viewed in the Middle Ages quite differently than in other epochs. Medieval beer — which was either thick, sweet, and low-alcohol, or thin, refreshing, and almost alcohol-free, depending on which wort was used for its preparation — was a regular staple on tables, just like, let's say, bread or dairy products. Medieval rations were far from being balanced and nutritious, and beer, which was considered healthy and curative, was a valuable addition to everyday meals. Some scholars claim that peasants were brewing beer more often than baking bread.[ref:unger-middle-ages:39]() As brewing was rather labor-intensive, there was something like an unspoken schedule as to which household brews beer which week. In England, for example, one-third to one-half of all households were occasionally brewing beer for sale.[ref:{"source":{"alias":"bennett-brewsters","short":"Bennett, J. M. (1996)","extra":["Ale, Beer, and Brewsters in England: Women's Work in a Changing World, 1300-1600","ISBN 9780195126501"]}}:19]()

Of course, alcoholic intoxication was condemned by moralists. However, they were condemning it using exactly the same wording as they used for condemning gluttony. Medieval beer rarely had a significant ABV. A lot of grain was needed to produce strong beer, which made it a luxury and unavailable to an average person. It appears that common folk weren't consuming beer to become intoxicated. It was rather an ordinary drink by which they got essential carbohydrates.[ref:unger-middle-ages:2-3]()

Beer Myth. Many popular sources claim that Medieval people preferred beer over water, the quality of which was poor. This is kind of an exaggerated generality. Yes, they did prefer beer in the sense that given the choice of whether to drink beer or water, they would likely choose beer — just like a contemporary person would! In the Middle Ages, people were well aware of water quality-related problems and knew that the best water was from rain or snowmelt. They avoided polluted water if they could. Some social groups like monks, sailors, or grandees, might have actually drunk beer instead of water, but that definitely was not a ubiquitous practice.[ref:{"source":{"alias":"zythophile","short":"Cornell, M.","extra":"Zythophile","href":"https://zythophile.co.uk/"}}:"Was water really regarded as dangerous to drink in the Middle Ages?"](http://zythophile.co.uk/2014/03/04/was-water-really-regarded-as-dangerous-to-drink-in-the-middle-ages/)

#### How to Taste It

Some breweries continue using gruit nowadays. These beers might be found by using “gruit beer” or “herbed beer” keywords. The most notable examples are:
 * Belgian Steenbrugge and Gentse *Gruut*
 * Dutch Jopen *Koyt*.

The “historical ales” by Williams Bros. we have mentioned in the “At the Dawn of Civilization” chapter in fact fall into the same category.

It's important to understand that these beers are merely substituting bog myrtle and other herbs instead for hops. They are totally inauthentic in any other sense. It's interesting mostly as a chance to experience the real sweet taste of beer which we in the 21st century are totally unfamiliar with.

However, we might still get a real medieval *gruitbeer*. One of the most popular beer varieties from those days called “mumme” (aka *mum* or *mumm*), which emerged in the 14th century, was so popular that it persisted almost unchanged until the 17th century. The recipe was written down several times, and comprised wheat malt with an addition of oats and beans, fir and birch tree-tops, elderberry, cardamom seeds, bay leaf, a lot of herbs — thistle, dewdrop, burnet, betony, marjoram, gravilat, marsh mint, thyme, — and fresh eggs.[ref:hornsey-history:388-389]()

The beer enthusiasts had reconstructed *mumme* based on those recipes, and the style now enjoys some segmented demand. Known examples are:
 * *Mumm* by Scratch Brewing Company
 * *Alte Hansa Mumme* brewed by the 7 Fjell and Vaat collaboration
 * Schiøtz *Mørk Mumme* by Albani Bryggerierne
 * Kongens Bryghus *Julemumme* by Husbryggeriet Jacobsen.

But let's not get it mixed up: a real *mumme* must be dark, thick, alcoholic, and possess quite a peculiar taste, closer to coke than beer. Thin light beer proudly produced in Braunschweig under this name (as well as an energy drink and a sweet paste) is directly related to the former glory of the Braunschweig's *Mumme*, but has totally lost any resemblance to the original recipe over the years.

#### Etymological Considerations

All this confusion with the word *gruit* switching its meaning from “starter” or “pastry” to “a set of herbs for beer-making” is quite typical. Almost every term related to brewing lost its original meaning, sometimes changing to quite the opposite one.

Romans and Greeks have different words for beer depending on the region of its origin: Phracian beer was called *brytos*, Spanish, *cervisia*, Egyptian, *zythos*. *Brytos* was possibly borrowed by the German tribes and became *breuwan* (or both these words derived from proto-Indo-European *bher*, to boil), which later gave birth to English *brew*, German *brauen*, and Dutch *brouwen*, and also *broth*, *bread*, and corresponding words in German, Dutch, and other related European languages.

Fun Fact. The words “Brazil” and “bride” derive from the same root as well. The former, through Old French *bresil* (to burn) that became *brasil*, meaning “red wood” in Spanish and Portuguese (probably, because of the wood color resembling smoldering embers); the territory of modern Brazil was called “terra de brasil” (“the land of redwood”) by the Portuguese. As for the latter, brewing beer was one of the many bride's duties, which is quite obvious in German: *Braut* stands for “bride”; *Brauer*, for “brewer.”

*Cervisia* became Spanish *cerveza* and Portuguese *cerveja*, beer. It's interesting that Romans borrowed the word *cervisia* from the Celtic tribes that lived in modern-day Spain, and its origin is proto-Indo-European “kerm,” making it of the same root as Slavic “korm,” forage.

Finally, *zythos* is nowadays widely used in modern craft subculture. For example, Martin Cornell, a well-known journalist and book author, writes on the [Zythophile](#bibliography-zythophile) blog.

The simplest and clearest situation is with the word “pivo” that stands for “beer” in Russian and other Slavic languages. It derives simply from the verb “piti,” to drink. From proto-Indo-European it came to the Greek language (*pinein*, to drink); from Greek to Latin (*bibere*), from Latin to Spanish (*bebida*) and Old French (*pocion*), from Old French to English (*potion*, *poison*, and *potable*). Interestingly, another English word for something drinkable — “beverage” — is likely derived from the same *bibere*, though the direct connection remains unclear.

Germans enriched our vocabulary with two more roots: *beer* and *ale*. The etymology of both is quite foggy. The former probably meant mead or cider initially (and therefore shares the same root with “bee”) as the Germans made no distinction between various sources of sugar for their beverages; or mundanely derived from the very same *bibere*. As for *ale*, its origin was influenced by Scandinavian and Baltic languages (probably, independently from English) where its derivatives (*øl*, *olut*) are still in use.

Sumerians, as we mentioned, used a lot of different words for different kinds of beer. One of them, *sikaru*, made it into Semitic languages for denoting any alcoholic beverage and was used in the Bible. Later, it entered Old French and became *cidre*.

Finally, the Latin word for a starter, *fermentum*, transformed into the scientific term “ferment” and in this capacity entered dictionaries of most of the world languages.
