### Word on Hops

##### Historical period: the 14th-16th centuries CE

##### Scene of action: German, Baltic, and Dutch Cities

Starting from the 14th century CE, gruit usage (and therefore gruit monopoly profits) begin to decline. The reason was the spread of a cheaper, more effective, and more convenient additive: hops.[ref:swinnen-briski-beeronomics:17]()

First, hop bitterness allowed brewers to overcome or even conquer unpleasant odors. Second, hops were a markedly more effective preservative than herb mixtures: alpha acids (or rather their isomers produced by heating wort) present in hops suppress the growth of bacteria, which prolongs the shelf life of beer up to half a year and even more. Third, and probably most important, brewing with hops allowed for utilizing the raw materials more efficiently. English documents from that time mention that adding hops results in producing twice (!) the amount of beer from the same amount of grain[ref:bennett-brewsters:85](): wort might be left to ferment longer, allowing higher sugar to alcohol conversion without the risk of spoiling.

The monks were probably the first who started brewing with hops, as the monasteries were the only beer producers in the early Middle ages who made enough beer to be concerned with prolonged storage.[ref:{"source":{"alias":"unger-holland","short":"Unger, R. W. (2001)","extra":["A History of Brewing in Holland: 900-1900. Economy, Technology and the State","ISBN 9004120378"]}}:27]() The first known mention of adding hops to wort comes from 822 CE in the instructions of Adalard, the abbot of Corbie, France, written for his brothers. In the 9th-10th centuries CE, the usage of hops in monasteries was already widespread, being found both within period chronicles and archeological evidence. Furthermore, hops were sometimes an ingredient in gruit.[ref:nelson-barbarian-beverage:110]() And yet, it took several hundred years (!) for hops to completely supplant gruit.[ref:unger-middle-ages:54-55]() A few reasons were named by scholars as follows.

  1. Technological issues: hops impart preservative qualities only if boiled (which allows alpha acids to isomerize, and it's the isomers that possess anti-bacterial properties). Hops added to gruit are useless from that point of view, and they could even spoil the wort. So brewing with hops implies adding an additional step of boiling hops for an hour or two. Hop use became more widespread when brewers accumulated enough capital to have separate vessels for mashing (e.g. preparing wort from ground grain and water) and boiling.[ref:unger-middle-ages:56]()

  2. At first, the bitter taste of hopped beer put off consumers.[ref:unger-middle-ages]() We now think that modern beer has a neutral taste; hop flavor is implicit. For a 15th-century Englishman, the sweet taste of ale was so habitual that bitter beer was drunk only by Dutch ex-pats despite its production being twice as cost-effective.[ref:bennett-brewsters:60]()

  3. Hops undermined the state or municipal monopoly on beer ingredients, so their usage was frequently opposed by local authorities, especially in Dutch towns.[ref:verberg-gruit:56]()

One way or another hops started to supersede gruit in the 13th century, in region after region. The important consequence of that (apart from bishops' and barons' whining about their incomes[ref:verberg-gruit]()) was the beginning of commercial brewing at scale. Beer became a product for transport to other towns; it became regional not just local.

Fun Fact. The true meaning of the word “gruit” was already forgotten sometime in the 15th century. There are surviving examples of using it as a synonym for brewing tax (sometimes even as *hoppengruit*, literally “the hops gruit”) and also as a verb meaning *mixing something as an ingredient*.[ref:verberg-gruit:57]()

With technological advancement, a key division of labor emerged. Brewing beer and selling it became different occupations. First brewers' guilds and beer trade regulations had been known since the 13th century in English and German lands.[ref:meussdoerffer-history:13]()

Beer, however, was a product poorly fit for transportation because of its considerable volume and weight. Moving beer by roads was problematic: the cost of a barrel increased by 25-70% every 100 kilometers, depending on the terrain and road quality.[ref:unger-holland:27]() The beer trade at this period wasn't a lucrative one and its margins were low. However, beer was quite a suitable commodity for maritime transportation, given that it was also a customary product to provide drink and vital calories to sailors. The first mentions of the naval beer trade began during the Viking era, circa the 11th century CE. In the 12th century, Bremen and Brugge were already mercantile centers of beer at scale. But the *real* maritime beer trade started with the development of the Hanseatic League.[ref:meussdoerffer-history:16]()

One of the two founding cities of Hansa, Hamburg, had literally become the world's brewing capital in the 14th century (partly as it was one of the earliest abolishers of the *gruitgeld*). In 1369, having around 14 thousand inhabitants, Hamburg exported 13.3 million liters of beer and consumed probably the same amount locally.[ref:unger-middle-ages:60]() At its peak, the Hanseatic League sold more than 50 million liters per year, and the League's navy drank another 25 million.[ref:meussdoerffer-history:17]() Beer manufacturing provided jobs to roughly half of Hamburg's craftsmen (475 out of 1075 in 1376). Other cities of the League were not far behind: there were 300 brewers in Bremen, 250 in Erfurt, 200 in Wismar and Leipzig (each), and 180 in Lubeck.[ref:unger-middle-ages:63-64]() Another number is even more revealing: 25-40% of all the grain those Medieval cities were importing was used by brewers.[ref:meussdoerffer-history:15]()

In the 15th century, however, the Hansa started to lose markets. As a more advanced maritime power and the more efficient beer producer alike, the Dutch put extreme pressure on the Hansa beer industry.[ref:meussdoerffer-history:20]() During the second half of the 14th century, the Netherlands, figuratively speaking, had converted from an agrarian village to an industrial city. The most important industrial sector was undoubtedly textiles; but brewing was certainly the second-most important.[ref:unger-holland:55]()

The Delft — Gouda — Haarlem triangle became a center of the Low Lands beer industry. Having a combined population of approximately 40 thousand people, these three cities were producing 100 million liters of beer by the second half of the 15th century and at the beginning of the 16th century.[ref:unger-holland:73]() During the heyday of beer production in the Netherlands (starting from the end of the 15th century up to the beginning of the 17th century), beer incomes (including excise/ sales taxes and customs duties) of many Dutch towns comprised one to two-thirds of the total income.[ref:unger-holland:69]()

#### How to Taste It

Given the ferocious competition between dozens of cities and hosts of brewers, it is no surprise that new beer trademarks emerged, reached commercial heights, and then disappear into nothingness *by the hundreds if not thousands*. One expert, Heinrich Klaus, counted 150 types of German beer only. To distinctly denote all of these beers, they employed a plethora of terms with dubious etymology and ever-changing meaning.[ref:unger-middle-ages:185]() Nevertheless, some of them gained so much popularity that they are still in use centuries later, and because of this, we may taste them today. (The longer a beer style existed, the higher the probability somebody bothered to write down the recipe down!)

The most authentic of such “dinosaurs” is the modern reconstruction of one of the most popular beer styles of the 14th century, the Dutch *koyt* (also spelled *kuyt* or *kuit*). You may judge how influential this beer was by the fact that citizens of Leeuwarden revolted in 1487 because *koyt* imports from Haarlem were banned.[ref](https://history.stackexchange.com/questions/23532/what-exactly-happened-with-beer-and-leeuwarden-in-1487)

The notable characteristic of *koyt* was its use of a large proportion of oats (more than 50%) which was the most widespread grain in the Netherlands at the time and possibly allowed for brewing better quality beer for the same money.[ref:unger-holland:127]() Nowadays many microbreweries in the Netherlands (and some in the US) produce beer in this style:

  * The most precise reconstruction is named Klavervier Koyt; brewers from Klavervier not only produce authentic beers but also contribute to the research of brewing history.
  * Two Jopen brands, Padvinderskuiten and Frans Hals Bier (Jopen Koyt despite its naming *is not a koyt*)
  * Oedipus Shampoo
  * Elora Windmolen Dutch Kuyt
  * Noord-Hollander Kuyt Bier
  * Grutte Pier Kuit
  * Ramses Bier Kuiter
  * Leidsch Kuitbier
  * High Oats by the Jabeerwocky-Nepomucen collaboration
  * Koyt by the Wander-Reuben's collaboration

Another beer style originating within the 14th-16th centuries is called *bock*. It is told that its name derived from the city of Einbeck; also the famed Martin Luther particularly loved that beer which reportedly strengthened his will at the Diet of Worms of 1521.[ref:{"source":{"alias":"jackson-blog","short":"Jackson, M.","extra":"The Beer Hunter","href":"http://www.beerhunter.com/index.html"}}:"Original Bock: the beer the doctor ordered"](http://www.beerhunter.com/documents/19133-000034.html) However, we may be very skeptical regarding this story as the sources that tell it are far from reliable. Nevertheless, technically speaking *bock* is quite close to the alleged pinnacle of the brewers' art of the 16th century: strong (means “expensive”) dark (of course) aged (therefore lacking smoky flavors) hopped beer. Einbeck, being a Hanseatic League member, was famous for its rigid control over beer quality.[ref:swinnen-briski-beeronomics:19]()

The “bock” of modern Germany is a totally different beer style, being a dark strong lager (see the next chapter). Dutch brewers (La Trappe, Hertog Jan, Jopen) and Belgian ones (Leute) more closely approximate the canonical recipe. Still, German *bockbier* (such as Ayinger Celebrator, Paulaner Salvator, Spaten Optimator, and other -or's) are quite good, though representing a later brewing tradition.
