### The Cold of Alpine Caves

##### Historical period: 15 century CE
##### Scene of action: Bavaria

Let's now discuss another vital beer ingredient: yeasts. Without them, you couldn't brew beer, make wine, nor bake bread. They were in some sense “domesticated” several thousand years ago. The fact that we actually know very little about yeast domestication makes this even more surprising.

We are now aware of more than 1500 yeast species. When humanity began its practices of brewing, wine-making, and baking, many different “wild” yeast strains were used for leavening or fermentation.

However, at the end of the 19th century when microbiologists began to study yeasts, it turned out that winemakers and bakers were using one very specific species: *Saccharomyces cerevisiae*, or simply “baker's yeast.” How exactly did humans isolate this specific yeast from the broad spectrum of wild species is presently unclear. We don't know exactly when our ancestors found S. cerevisiae in the wild, how they propagated it, nor when this actually occurred. The latest research demonstrates that quite probably S. cerevisiae was first isolated during the industrial revolution in brewing, e.g. relatively recently.[ref:{"source":{"alias":"gallone-yeast","short":"Gallone, B., Mertens, S., Gordon, J. L., Maere, S., Verstrepen, K., Steensels, J. (2017)","extra":["Origins, evolution, domestication and diversity of Saccharomyces beer yeasts","Current Opinion in Biotechnology, Volume 49"],"href":"https://www.sciencedirect.com/journal/current-opinion-in-biotechnology/vol/49/suppl/C"}}:149]()

By contrast, we know rather well the origins of another yeast species used by brewers, *Saccharomyces pastorianus*. It was actually bred by humans as a result of the hybridization of the above-mentioned S. cerevisiae and “wild” *Saccharomyces eubayanus*[ref:gallone-yeast:151]() presumably in the 15th century CE in Bavaria. During this period, brewers struggled with beer spoilage and unpleasant odors, and low temperatures helped with both. In their determination to produce better beer, Bavarian brewers (probably, monks of the secluded monasteries[ref:jackson-blog:"The birth of lager"](http://www.beerhunter.com/documents/19133-000255.html)) began to store their beer in cold Alpine caves, just several degrees above zero Celsius — bred and cultivated a new yeast species. Traditionally, beer was left to ferment at room temperature (around 20 Celsius) for several days; a new Bavarian technique implied a prolonged fermentation period (roughly 3 weeks) and then storing beer at 5-10° Celsius for an even longer period of time. This new type of beer was called “lager,” meaning “to store” in German. “Lagering” as a specific brewers' activity was first mentioned in 1420 CE. However, it was not widespread until the sixth decade of the 19th century; because for obvious reasons the cold brewing technology required a huge amount of ice.[ref:meussdoerffer-history:28]()

#### How to Taste It

The first lagers were still dark beer (and remained as such up until the 20th century), so the most authentic ones are contemporary German dark lagers (so-called *dunkelbier*) or German *bockbier*, which is still produced utilizing lagering techniques. You may try any *dunkel* and in fact, it's quite a common modern dark beer. The most praised examples of the style are Ayinger and Andechser, though for a full submersion, you might try to find Weltenburger (the brewery at the Weltenburg Abbey was founded in 1050, considered one of the oldest in the world) or Spaten *Dunkel* (produced since the 14th century).

#### The taste and the temperature

Yeast strains define not only the rapidity and the temperature of the fermentation but also how the process *unfolds*. Baker's yeast ferments intensively, forming a thick foam on the beer's surface, *krausen*, which brewers often scoop off and use as a starter for the next brew. By contrast, lager yeast ferments calmly, does not produce a lot of foam, and sinks, working from the bottom of the vessel. That's why corresponding beverages are colloquially called “top-fermented” and “bottom-fermented” beers respectively — though brewers had long ago developed baker's yeast strains that sank to the bottom as well. The “high-temperature fermentation” (or “warm”) and “low-temperature fermentation” terms in actuality describe the situation more precisely but regretfully see rare use.

For high-temperature fermented beers, the word “ale” is now used almost universally (which has exactly zero historical justification), and S. cerevisiae yeast is likewise dubbed “ale yeast.” In this book, we use the word “ale” only for beverages that were called ales at the time they originated, and not for denoting yeast species. If such an indication is needed, in this book it will always be explicit. Other yeast species used by brewers (of Brettanomyces genus, for instance) are also considered “top-fermenting.” 

The difference between high and low-temperature fermentation is that chemical reactions happen more turbulently at higher temperatures and enrich beer with complex esters that produce and are responsible for fruit flavors: bananas, raisins, berries, etc. Low-temperature beer has a more accentuated “bread-like” profile and contains fewer 'fruity' subtleties in its taste and aroma. Interestingly, lager yeast might be forced to ferment at higher temperatures; the resulting beverage is called *steambeer*.
