### Barrels and Bretts
##### Historical period: the 16th-17th centuries CE
##### Scene of action: England

After the Netherlands had switched to hopped beer, Britain remained the only bastion of the sweet malt beverage (which they called “ale”). At the beginning of the 15th century CE, England was consuming an enormous quantity: a gallon of ale per day (approx. 4.5 liters) was the golden standard for provisioning soldiers, servants, monks, and even hospital inmates.[ref:bennett-brewsters:17]()

Quite detailed descriptions of British ale brewing techniques survived: importantly, they prescribe no boiling of the wort, so ale was doomed to spoil very quickly. Furthermore, sometimes even gruit was not included in the recipe, which made the resulting product even less stable. A 1542 recipe specifically points out that ale should not be kept for more than five days.[ref:hornsey-history:324]() Under those conditions, wort was not allowed to ferment fully: attenuation (e.g. the share of soluble compounds that yeasts consume and convert) was low. Ale was much thicker and more viscous than we are accustomed to nowadays. If required to make a beer for keeping, brewers had to increase alcohol content and use a ridiculously wasteful amount of grain.

Fun Fact. One of the most prized kinds of ales in the 16th-century England was a replica of German *mumme* (see the “Word on Hops” chapter) — with a British accent, as some *mumme* ingredients were not grown in the British Isles.

Probably, the lack of major producers due to the instability of ale was one of the reasons why England resisted hops for more than 200 years. Archeologists have found traces of hops in fossils dating all the way back to the 10th century CE, and the first documents mentioning hopped beer originate from the 14th century CE.[ref:hornsey-history:309-312]() However, despite technological advancements, hops belatedly played a significant role in English brewing only by the 16th century CE.

Initially, it was immigrants (German, Dutch, and Flemish) who started to brew hopped beer for their own consumption, and ironically, to be sold to the Netherlands.[ref:bennett-brewsters:80]() Englishmen even borrowed the word to denote the “foreign” beverage, *bier*, which later became “beer.” That led to a paradoxical situation of two independent guilds — beer makers and ale makers — existing simultaneously and quite actively fighting one other.[ref:hornsey-history:323]()

Beer Myth. Using different words for beer and ale resulted in a common misconception shared by many scholars, “hops were prohibited in 16th century England.” It started with period witnesses and ends with the authors of comprehensive monographs written in the 21st century. Yet it is not true: it was prohibited to brew *ale* with hops but it was never prohibited to make *beer* with them. This myth was first proclaimed by Thomas Fuller in 1662, and since then it continued to travel from one book to another. It is also stated that Henry VI banished hops as a “pernicious and wicked weed”: this false quote originates in the same book of Fuller's.[ref:zythophile:"Myth 2: Hops were forbidden by Henry VI"](https://zythophile.co.uk/false-ale-quotes/myth-two-hops-were-forbidden-by-henry-vi/)

Foreigners were seemingly losing this war, however, the sheer historical inevitability of change forced English monarchs into supporting “alien” producers. England was struggling to become a naval power, which would be impossible without beer (and not just any beer, but one of a certain quality: it must have had enough shelf life to survive several months in a voyage, and ideally be cheap). In the 15th-16th century CE, beer was a daily norm for European sailors being literally consumed in place of water. Ships were universally supplied with beer at the rate of 3 to 5 liters per crewman per day throughout all the northern parts of Europe,[ref:unger-middle-ages:129]() from the Netherlands and Hansa to the Russian Empire under Peter the Great.[ref:{"source":{"alias":"durov-peter-beer","short":"Дуров, И.Г. (2014)","extra":["Производство и обеспечение пивом кораблей Балтийского флота при Петре Великом","Военно-исторический журнал"],"href":"http://history.milportal.ru/proizvodstvo-i-obespechenie-pivom-korablej-baltijskogo-flota-pri-petre-velikom/"}}]() English monarchs had been shipping beer to their overseas garrisons since the 15th century,[ref:{"source":{"alias":"change-is-brewing","short":"Krenzke, J. R. (2014)","extra":["Change Is Brewing: The Industrialization of the London Beer-Brewing Trade, 1400-1750","Dissertations. 1276"],"href":"https://ecommons.luc.edu/luc_diss/1276/"}}:39]() and at the end of the 16th century, Samuel Pepys, the Secretary of the Admiralty, secured a one-gallon daily ration of beer for sailors.[ref:meussdoerffer-history:22]()

The other reason why hopped beer was slowly but steadily advancing was the ability to brew stronger beverages. Because of low attenuation, English ale likely contained not more than 2.5% ABV. The elite “double” (e.g. brewed with a double measure of grain) kinds of ale reached maybe 5%. Hopped “double” beer might be 8-10%, and even stronger versions (so-called “doble-doble,” e.g. the “double-double”), up to 15%. In the 16th century, the English gentry was literally hunting for stronger beers, as they were a substitute for expensive imported wine and brandy. Edward VI, Mary I, and Elizabeth I were in turns fighting against the “doble-doble” but apparently had not succeeded.[ref:{"source":{"alias":"amber-gold-black","short":"Cornell, M. (2010)","extra":["Amber, Gold & Black. The History of Britain's Great Beers","ISBN 9780752475943"]}}:157-158]()

Fun Fact. The final victory of beer over ale happened in 1710 when the Parliament banned hop substitutes (of course, for taxation reasons).[ref:zythophile:"A short history of hops"](https://zythophile.co.uk/2009/11/20/a-short-history-of-hops/) The language changed as well: starting from the 17th century, the words “ale” and “beer” began meaning slightly and strongly hopped beer, respectively. Paradoxically, the legal distinction between beer and ale persisted: for example, beer was prescribed to be sold in 36-gallon barrels, while ale was to be sold in the 32-gallon ones.[ref:amber-gold-black:28]()

Beer production had been constantly increasing throughout the 17th century, reaching its peak in 1691: London had brewed more than 2 million barrels, e.g. approximately 300 million liters, having a population of 600 thousand — that's five liters of beer per day per inhabitant, including children.

The technological advancement impacted English beer bars (*alehouses*, taverns, or since the 17th century “pubs” — short for a “public house”): if ale was to be sold shortly after it was brewed, beer might be kept for a prolonged time, so new terms emerged: “mild ale” or “running ale” for fresh beer, and “keeping ale” or “stale ale” for aged beer. For the first time, aged beer actually came into being as a mass-produced product. (Unhopped ales could be kept for a prolonged time as well, but only the strongest and most expensive ones.[ref:change-is-brewing:22]())

While producing those keeping ales, English brewers had created and developed a new methodology (initially by accident, presumably). Beer stored in a barrel for a long time continued to slowly ferment: barrel staves gave shelter to yeasts, initially being inoculated by accident, and later simply absorbing remains of the previous brew. “Wild” yeasts, unlike the baker's and the lager ones, are much more resilient (it was impossible to purge them from barrels) and are capable of fermenting *anaerobically* (oxygen-free), breaking down complex sugars (maltodextrins) that were present in abundance in thick wort and normally not consumed by regular baker's yeasts — but they did it very slowly over a period of many months.

So, finally, after a year or two, the beverage in the barrel will be quite different compared to the initial one. First, beer loses its carbonation. Second, it becomes stronger in alcohol content and extremely dry: during the prolonged keeping time yeasts will break down all fermentable sugars. Third, the look and the taste change: beer becomes more clean and clear, the hop bitterness diminishes, and the characteristic acidity (or even tartness) is added up alongside the taste of the barrel itself. As a result, tavern keepers had new work to do: mixing up a high-quality but stale aged ale with a fresh one to provide a better-tasting beer to sell.

These aged beers were called “stale” (from “stall”[ref:amber-gold-black:26]()), “keeping,” “old,” and starting from the 17th century — “stock.” Typically, they had 6% alcohol by volume, though stronger beers having 10% or even more were also produced to please the respected gentlemen's tastes (such strong beers since the 19th century are known as “barleywines”).

British stock ales were sometimes aged for 5, 10, or more years (and *much more*! there is a batch of Bass No. 1 strong ale brewed in 1869, *and it's still drinkable*[ref:amber-gold-black:160]()).

#### How to Taste It

“Real” English ale can't be bought because of its short shelf life, but you might try brewing it yourself[ref:{}:"Kerthjalfadsson, T. (1998). Recreating Medieval English Ales (a recreation of late 13th - 14th c. unhopped English ales)"](https://www.cs.cmu.edu/~pwp/tofi/medieval_english_ale.html).

Stock barrel-aged ales have not been produced for a long time now, but there are several craft reproductions, most notably — Greene King *Strong Suffolk / Olde Suffolk*, which is prepared as a mixture of fresh ale and a stale one, aged for two years.

Apart from authentic stock ales, there are a lot of “old ales” being produced nowadays. However, “old ale” is an umbrella term for several different beer styles of different ages. The closest to the 17th-century ales are dark barrel-aged beers. The classics are English Robinson *Old Tom*, Theakston *Old Peculier*, Adnams *Tally Ho!*, and Scottish Harviestoun *Ola Dubh*. Stock ales were quite popular in the US, so many American brewers produce them as well — for example, Alesmith *Olde Ale* or Founders *Curmudgeon Old Ale*.

As for beers that are called “mild ales” today, it is a much more contemporary invention, having nothing in common with the 17th-century ones.

#### It's All about the Yeast

In the beginning of the 20th century, Niels Claussen, a Carlsberg Labs employee, found a new species of yeast in British stock ale that was responsible for adding the famous “British taste” to beer. Claussen named the new kind of microorganism “Brittanomyces,” e.g. “The British fungus,” literally[ref:amber-gold-black:161]() (which is totally correct in Latin; however, somehow a variant with a typo became normative: *Brettanomyces*, with “e”). *Brettanomyces* (or “bretts” in the brewers' slang) today are the third choice of yeasts for a brewer (after the lager and the bakers' ones). Some breweries specialize in “bretts,” and also some wineries employ them as well.

Almost every style of the 17th-18th century aged beers — stock ales, porters, and pale ales as well, as we will discuss in the next chapters — were passing a phase of secondary fermentation driven by “bretts,” simply because it was impossible to get rid of them. These days, “wild” yeasts are considered to be brewers' worst enemies, and all the equipment is sterilized against inoculating wort with unwanted microorganisms. That's why contemporary “old ales” have nothing to do with the original production, except for craft restorations. Only Belgian *saisons* and brown ales (which we will describe in detail in the second section of this book) preserved the original taste of those beers.

Fun Fact. Also, *Brettanomyces* is notable because of being the first patented microorganism in human history, as Claussen was granted patent No. GB190328184 for his discovery.