### It's All About Water
##### Historical period: the 18th century CE
##### Scene of Action: Burton upon Trent

In the beginning of the 18th century, London was the world's brewing capital by a vast margin. Hansa hadn't recovered after the Thirty Years' War of 1618-1648 and the Netherlands was severed by the wars of religion even more so than the League. By the  end of the 17th century it had rebuilt its economics, but not the brewing industry for a host of reasons: high taxes as well as grape wine and strong alcohol expansion throughout Northern Europe. The growing popularity of porter strengthened London's superiority even further. 

However, closer to the end of the 18th century, Londoners got an unexpected (and initially barely visible) competitor: the small town of Burton located on the banks of the Trent river. Its population in 1710 was a mere 1800 citizens. Burton had been well-known for its beer since the Middle Ages, but situated quite far from trade routes. Therefore, its popularity never exceeded its direct vicinity. The situation changed in 1712 when the Parliament extended the navigation on Trent from the Port of Hull down to Burton.

The first commercial (e.g. not related to some local pub) brewery was opened in Burton by Benjamin Printon in 1708. With the possibility of trade expansion, other establishments emerged, including those by Benjamin Wilson (later passed to Wilson's great-nephew, Samuel Allsopp), William Worthington, and William Bass.[ref:brewing-in-burton:7-9, 19]()

The expansion of river trade coincided with another important factor: the growing interest in English beer from the Baltic states, namely Poland and the Russian Empire.  Peter the Great of Russia had visited England and it is said that he brought with him a love for English beer. No reliable source on the matter has survived, and Peter in his own inimitable way had in fact established the beer industry in Russia itself.[ref:durov-peter-beer](). However, maritime trade was growing, accelerating further towards the end of the century. Imports to Russia, the majority of which were controlled by Burton, comprised 100 thousand liters in 1750 and more than 1.5 million liters by 1775[ref:{"source":{"alias":"brewing-in-burton","short":"Webster, I. (2018)","extra":["Brewing in Burton upon Trent","ISBN 9781445670553"]}}:9-10]()

Burtoners owed this expansion to water. First, the River Trent gave access to British ports. Second, Burton held truly unique local water sources. Burton's water was hard and rich in calcium and magnesium sulfates. It turned out that this water suited brewing exceptionally well, stimulating the growth of yeasts and allowing for intensive hopping. Burton beer was more carbonated and much clearer than London beer (and it also contained the unique “Burton snatch” — the fleeting “aroma” of sulfur that occurred shortly after pouring).

Fun Fact. London brewers were struggling to solve the puzzle of Burton water, and finally developed the “burtonisation” process of enriching water with sulfates.

Yet another factor that contributed to the development of the brewing industry as a whole (and the Burton one in particular) was the spread of pale malts. England had been struggling with the wood shortage for decades and had converted to using coal quite early. A major problem with coal was that it might be used for heating wort, but not for kilning as the sulfur smell of burning coal was considered unacceptable.[ref](https://www.beeretseq.com/where-theres-smoke-theres-pale-ale/) As a result, malt was dried over expensive wood, even more expensive straw, or the best Wales anthracite, the supply of which was limited.

In 1603, Hugh Plat got a patent for his innovation of producing coke from coal, analogous to the production of charcoal from wood. For some time, this invention remained unnoticed until the malt makers employed it in the 1640s. Coke demonstrates extraordinary qualities. First, it produces no fumes. Second, it burns in a much more controllable manner in terms of temperature. Due to these features, it is controllable within low-temperature conditions. Brewers were then able to produce malt that was not “smoked”.[ref:zythophile:"Burton: NOT the first place in the world to brew pale beers"](https://zythophile.co.uk/2009/11/26/burton-not-the-first-place-in-the-world-to-brew-pale-beers/) This malt was called “pale,” and the resulting beer, “pale ale.”

Pale malt has a huge advantage over darker malts: it contains more sugars, which allows for more efficient beer production (and the taste of the resulting beverage is much clearer as yeasts might break down a higher proportion of chemical compounds dissolved in wort). This fact was likely not explicitly known to brewers until the saccharometer (e.g. the sugar concentration measuring device) was invented. If it had been implicitly discovered, it would have still made a small impact as coke was too expensive for commercial brewing. Pale ales were mostly produced in the households of the wealthy gentry in Northern England.

Let us stress that malt will be “dark” or “pale” depending on the temperature in which it was kilned. Technically, it's possible to produce “pale” malt in a wooden kiln (though it would still be “smoked,” e.g. dark in color). Making pale (and even non-smoked) malt was quite possible before the invention of coke, but required much more effort. Let's just say that making brown malt took thrice less time.[ref:{"source":{"alias":"pattinson-shut-up","short":"Pattinson, R.","extra":"Shut up about Barclay Perkins","href":"http://barclayperkins.blogspot.com/"}}:"Mid-18th Century Malting"](http://barclayperkins.blogspot.com/2009/09/mid-18th-century-malting.html)

Fun Fact. the Netherlands started suffering from a lack of wood even earlier than England. However, without the innovation of coke, the Dutch switched to using peat. You might imagine the taste of Dutch beer in the 16th century.

Those two factors, namely hard water and pale malt, led to the birth of the “Burton Ale,” which was a thick, strong, intensively hopped sweet beer. However, it was not literally pale. Malt was additionally roasted or caramelized. Today, we would call this beer “amber.”

The history of Burton Ale consists of rises and falls, half a century passing between each. The period of prosperity based on the Baltic trade did not last long. In 1783, Russian authorities imposed a 300 percent tax on beer imports. They were then obliged to follow the *Continental Blockade* of British goods during the Napoleonic era. The annexation of Poland by Russia  had also closed the Polish market for English brewers. Finally, in 1822, a new Russian customs tariff was introduced that effectively banned various and sundry imports (including beer) from Britain. As a result, at the beginning of the 19th century, the Burton brewing industry deteriorated (four out of 15 breweries were closed, several others sold[ref:brewing-in-burton:29]()) — just to make the rebirth from the ashes (the story of which shall be told in the next chapter) even more spectacular.

After sales were rerouted to other markets, Burton Ale of the middle-to-late 19th century became exquisitely pale (it would have been hard to tell the difference between “Burton Ale,” “old ale,” and “barleywine” of that period), but in the early 20th century the pendulum swung in the opposite direction. The public adored dark caramel beers once again, and Burton Ale (in its original dark sweet form) gained its popularity anew. It was so popular that in the British Air Force there was a euphemism for those who had not returned from the mission — “gone for Burton”.[ref:amber-gold-black:43]()

The 1960s proved to be disastrous for Burton Ale; it disappeared almost overnight.

#### How to taste them

The only Burton Ale that survived the 20th century is “Winter Warmer” by Young. Other renowned examples of the style are “1845” by Fuller's and Ballantine Burton Ale, the production of which was restored based on the surviving recipes, and also Marston's Owd Rodger and Theakston”s Old Peculier. And of course, there are craft versions.