### The Age of Empires
##### Historical period: the 19th century CE
##### Scene of action: London, Burton upon Trent, Saint Petersburg

The Russian customs tariff of 1822 that finally buried Burton's Baltic trade (see the ‘It's all about Water’ chapter) contained one important exception: porter. It likely occurred as porter was not produced within the Russian Empire itself but demand remained strong. Hence, the Burtoners lost a market for their ale, and the Londoners in turn captured a market for their porter. In 1815, Saint Petersburg imported 150 thousand liters of porter. In 1840, British traders shipped 300 thousand liters in barrels and  more than 35 thousand bottles. A period story illustrates this point: in 1865, Russian officers invited their British counterparts to a dinner celebrating the end of the Crimean War. One of the attending English officers later recounted of how startled he was by the fact that the A. Le Coq porter was served, as British officers themselves hadn't had *any* porter in the Crimea[ref:{"short":"Cornell, M. (2017)","extra":["Albert Le Coq and the Russian Stout trade","Brewery History, 172"]}:3](http://www.breweryhistory.com/journal/archive/172/LeCoq.pdf)!

As a result of this London-Burton reshuffling, the ‘Russian Imperial Stout’ was born. London beer makers, trying to reproduce the thick and strong Burton ale of which Russian customers were so fond, started to brew *approximate* porters. (Let us remind you that the word ‘stout’ initially denoted strong varieties of any beer, but later became exclusively associated with porters.)

Beer Myth - It is sometimes said that Russian imperial stouts were made so thick and strong because regular stouts would freeze on their way to Saint Petersburg. This statement is nonsense, not just in the historical sense, but according to grade-school physics as well. If the sea or waterway that the ship traveled was unfrozen, then the beer barrels in the bilges would not freeze either.

The word ‘Imperial’ in the ‘Russian Imperial Stout’ is not dereived from the Russian imperial court as one might think. It was a convenient name for ‘premium’ (which implies ‘strong’) beers in general (and it's actually being used in this sense nowadays — this time,  for a change, from a historical point of view). As for the word ‘Russian’, it first popped up at the end of the 19th century; in advertisements, of course[ref:zythophile:"Imperial Stout — Russian or Irish?"](https://zythophile.co.uk/2011/06/26/imperial-stout-russian-or-irish/). (Before that, it would be rather not *comme il faut* to designate anything ‘Russian’, as London-Moscow relations remained tense.)

Fun Fact - As a peculiar result of the cessation of trade between Britain and Russia, local porter production emerged in Polish territories. Today, this style is called ‘Baltic porter’ and constitutes a strong dark lager. However, in the 19th century, Polish brewers had originally reconstructed the authentic British porter, and later they changed their production methods in favor of cold fermentation under the German influence[ref:zythophile](https://zythophile.co.uk/2021/01/16/its-baltic-porter-day-a-good-excuse-for-punching-a-few-baltic-porter-myths-in-the-face/).

In the 19th century, porter wasn't a cheap murky booze as it was a century before. The spread of pale malt (many thanks to Burtoners) had allowed for more effective usage of raw materials. It affected porter production as well as its cost efficiency was its main advantage. First, the porter grain bill changed to two parts brown malt plus three parts pale malt. Later, in 1817, Daniel Wheeler patented a revolutionary method of roasting malt at 400 degrees Fahrenheit that allowed for porters to be brewed from pale malt only;one part roasted and seven parts pale[ref:amber-gold-black:64]().

Fun Fact - Contemporary brewers now employ this technique universally. Almost all varieties of dark beer are made from pale malt, with additions of varied roasted or caramelized malt as needed.

By the mid 19th century, the Burtoners also had to change their recipes as Burton Ale was much less popular in country than it was abroad a century before. Englishmen considered it too heavy; thick ales and porters gained a reputation as beverages for high latitudes. (In 1852, Burton brewers prepared a special ‘Arctic Ale’ for Sir Edward Belcher's polar expedition — extremely strong dark beer that demonstrated exceptional resilience. According to Belcher himself, it would not freeze even at -50 Celcius - as incredible as it may seem, explorers may be prone to exaggeration - Arctic ale was brewed for polar expeditions for the next one hundred years[ref:amber-gold-black:160]()!)

#### How to taste them

Russian Imperial Stout (sometimes abbreviated as ‘RIS’) is nowadays one of the most popular styles of beer, solidly occupying the top-ten lists of many rankings. However, one should take into account the fact that the British tradition of brewing RIS had died in the 1980s, and was later restored by American craft brewers (Goose Island, Stone, Bell's, Founders, Cigar City, Oskar Blues, and others). Some craft brewers are producing Arctic Ale as well, most notably, Harpoon Brewery.