### Bog Myrtle

##### Historical period: the 10th-14th centuries CE

##### Scene of action: Low Lands and the northern parts of nowadays Germany

The fall of the Roman Empire entailed lots of consequences, including those to the beer history. The pressure that ‘civilized’ Romans put on the brewing industry has ended. New powers of Ireland and Britain as well as Merovingian and Carolingian kingdoms were drinking beer with great pleasure. The Anglo-Saxons were using beer as a ‘currency’ for natural exchange: all kinds of duties and wages were paid with it[ref:nelson-barbarian-beverage:88]().

Medieval suzerains soon began attempting to control the production of this 'currency', just like any regular state would do in their place. The taxation mechanism was soon found: Emperor Charlemagne proclaimed brewing a state monopoly and started selling it to lords and bishops, who, in their turn, monetized thier brewing rights by producing beer ingredients and selling them to local brewers. After Charlmagne's death, the Empire weakened, but the monopoly persisted in German and Low States lands[ref:meussdoerffer-history:11]().

Those ingredients, or rather semiproducts, were called *fermentum* in Latin, and *gruit* (*grut*, *grout* and other variants) in local languages. *Fermentum* means ‘starter’, e.g. some additive that makes bread and bear ‘raise’ (we now learned that leaven contains yeast, but in the Middle Ages nobody knew that). *Gruit* means ‘grind’, which looks totally unrelated. And nowadays we use the word *gruit* for a selection of aromatic herbs. This contradiction is resolved easily: medieval gruit was all of that at once.

Beer spoiling was brewers' main problem. There were two main ways of avoiding it: increase alcohol content or add preservatives. Medieval *fermentum*/*gruit* helped with both. The preparation process included grinding the malt, cooking kind of a porridge, and evaporating it. Resulting malt concentrate was either solid or paste-like substance depending on whether cereals were filtered out or not. This malt porridge could have been used for making pastries which explains using the *fermentum* and *gruit* words to denote baked goods[ref:{"short":"Ruis, F. (2016)","extra":["A Note on the Essence of Gruit","Brewery History, 166"]}:52](http://www.breweryhistory.com/journal/archive/166/index.html). Additional, some flavor additives, mostly herbal, were mixed in.

This malt concentrate was sold to brewers, and it was indeed quite usefult: adding this gruit to the wort will cause yeast to proliferate quickly and produce a large amount of alcohol, thus suppressing the growth of competing microorganisms — which for an observer would look like if gruit indeed leavens the wort. Modern reenactors managed to achieve quite considerable shelf life for such gruite beer, more than three weeks[ref:{"source":{"alias":"verberg-blog","short":"Verberg, S.","extra":"Medieval Mead and Beer. Experimental brewing with Medieval flair","href":"https://medievalmeadandbeer.wordpress.com/"}}:"Reconstructing the substance gruit: an experiment"](https://medievalmeadandbeer.wordpress.com/2021/03/29/reconstructing-the-substance-gruit-an-experiment/).

Flavor additives also played a major role. First, they had some antiseptic effect; second, helped to conceal unpleasant taste and smell; third, because of them beer was considered being healthy and even curative. Different sources mention more than 40 distinct additives, and 14 more were added for medecinal reasons[ref:meussdoerffer-history:15](): wild rosemary, yarrow, juniper, sage, ground ivy, anise, caraway, laurel berries; pine resins were also used. In fact, every town possessed its own unique gruit recipe depending on local flora. However, there was one the most important component: bog myrtle (Myrica gale) which was traditionally used as both sedative and antiseptic compound. In addition, bog mirtle is rather capricious and grows (surprise!) mostly in bogs, and was a convenient subject for the state monopoly[ref:unger-middle-ages:31-32]().

For medieval suzerains (barons and bishops) and, later, for city magistrates gruit was a handy and understanble method of collecting taxes[ref:unger-middle-ages:49](). Towns were buying the privelege (*gruitrecht*) from their segnors and opening the ‘gruit houses’ (*gruithuis*)[ref:unger-middle-ages:45](). Often, instead of buying gruit in the gruithousr, brewers were paying their duties in money; such a levy was called  *gruitgeld* (literally, ‘gruit gold’)[ref:unger-middle-ages:64]().

However, the significance of centralized starter production was gradually declining. Later records indicate that in the 13th century gruit houses were purchasing much more herbs in proportion to malt than needed[ref:verberg-gruit:55](). Some scholars believe that brewers were bringing malt to the gruit houses to be mashed with gruit there (and therefore the exact recipe was kept secret)[ref:swinnen-briski-beeronomics:17](). Since nobody cared about writing down such obvious things as gruit usage (just like any other details regarding brewing), later researchers were convinced that gruit was just a mix of herbs to flavor beer[ref:{"source":{"alias":"verberg-gruit","short":"Verberg, S. (2018)","extra":["The Rise and Fall of Gruit","Brewery History, 174"],"href":"http://www.breweryhistory.com/journal/archive/174/index.html"}}:50]().

### Beer in the Middle Ages

Let us stress that beer consumption was viewed in the Middle Ages quite differently as in other epochs. Medieval beer — which was either thick, sweet, and low-alcohol, or thin, refreshing, and almost alcohol-free, depending on which wort was used for its preparation — was a regular product on tables, just like, let's say, bread or dairy products. Medieval rations were far from being nutritious and balanced, and beer, which was considered healthy and curative, was a valuable addition to everyday meals. Some scholars claim that peasants were brewing beer more often than baking bread[ref:unger-middle-ages:39](). As brewing was rather labor-intensive, there were something like unspoken schedule which household brews beer which week. In England, for example, one third to one half of all households were occasionaly brewing beer for selling[ref:{"source":{"alias":"bennett-brewsters","short":"Bennett, J. M. (1996)","extra":["Ale, Beer, and Brewsters in England: Women's Work in a Changing World, 1300-1600","ISBN 9780195126501"]}}:19]().

Of course, alcoholic intoxication was condemned by moralists; but they were condemning it using exactly the same wording as they used for condemning gluttony. Medieval beer rarely had significant ABV: to produce strong beer a lot of grain were needed, which made it luxorious and unavailable to average men. It looks like common folk wasn't consuming beer to get intoxicating; it was rather an ordinary drink meaning to get essential carbohydrates.

Beer Myth. Many popular sources claim that Medieval people preferred beer over water, quality of which was poor. It's a kind of manipulation: yes, they were, in that sense that given the choice whether drink beer or water they would likely choose beer — just like a contemporary person would! In the Middle Ages, people were well aware of water quality-related problems, and knew quite well that the best water was that of rain or snowmelt, and avoided polluted water if they can. Some social groups like monks, sailors, or grandees, might have actually drunk beer instead of water, but that definitely wasn't a ubiquitous practice[ref:zythophile:"Was water really regarded as dangerous to drink in the Middle Ages?"](http://zythophile.co.uk/2014/03/04/was-water-really-regarded-as-dangerous-to-drink-in-the-middle-ages/).

#### How to taste

Some breweries continue using gruit nowadays. These beers might be found by ‘gruit beer’ or ‘herbed beer’ keywords. The most notable examples are:

 * Belgian Steenbrugge and Gentse Gruut;

 * Dutch Jopen Koyt.

The ‘historical ales’ by Williams Bros. we have mentioned int the ‘At the Dawn of Civilization’ chapter in fact fall into the same category.

It's important to understand that these beers are just using bog myrtle and other herbs instead of hops. They are totally not authentic in any other sense; it's interesting mostly as a possibility to check the real sweet taste of beer which we in the 21st centure are totally unfamiliar with.

However, we might still get a real medieval *gruitbeer*. One of the most popular beer varities from those days named ‘mumme’ (aka *mum* or *mumm*), which emerged in the 14th century, was so popular that persisted almost unchaged until 17th century. The recipe was written down several times, and comprise wheat malt with oats and beans, fir and birch tree tops, eldelberry, cardamom seeds, bay leaf, a lot of herbs — thistle, dewdrop, burnet, betony, marjoram, gravilat, marsh mint, thyme, — and fresh eggs[ref:hornsey-history:388-389]().

The beer enthusiasts had reconstructed mumme based on those rescipes, and the styles enjoys some demand. Known examples are:

 * Mumm by Scratch Brewing Company;

 * Hansa Mumme brewed in collaboration by 7 Fjell and Vaat Alte;

 * Schiøtz Mørk Mumme by Albani Bryggerierne;

 * Scratch Mumm;

 * Kongens Bryghus Julemumme by Husbryggeriet Jacobsen.

Just don't get it mixed up: real *mumme* must be dark, thick, alcoholic and possess quite peculiar taste close to coke than beer. Thin light beer proudly produced in Braunschweig under this name (as well as an energetic drink and sweet paste) is directly connected to the former glory of the Braunschweig Mumme, but totally lost any resemblance to the original over all those years.

#### Ethimological

All this confusion with the word *gruit* switching its meaning from ‘starter’ or ‘pastry’ to ‘a set of herbs for beer-making’ is quite a charactristical one. Almost every term related to brewing lost its original meaning, sometimes changing to quite the opposite one.

Romans and Greeks have different words for beer depending on the region of its origin: Phracian beer was called *brytos*; Spanish, *cervisia*; Egyptian, *zythos*. *Brytos* was possibly borrowed by the German tribes and became *breuwan* (or both these words derived from proto-Indo-European *bher*, to boil), which later gave birth to English *brew*, German *brauen*, and Dutch *brouwen*, and also *broth*, *bread*, and corresponding words in German, Dutch, and other european languages.

Fun Fact. Words ‘Brazil’ and ‘bride’ derived from the same root. The former, through Old French *bresil* (to burn) that became *brasil*, meaning ‘red wood’ in Spanish and Portuguese (probably, because of the wood color, resembling smoldering embers); the territory of nowadays Brazil was called ‘terra de brasil’ (‘the land of redwood’) by the Portuguese. As for the latter, brewing beer was one of many brides' duties, which is quite obvioous in German: Braut stand for ‘bride'; Brauer, for ‘brewer’.

*Cervisia* became Spanish *cerveza* and Portuguese *cerveja*, beer. It's interesting that Romans borrowerd the word *cervisia* from the Celtic tribes that lived in nowadays Spain, and it's origin is proto-Indo-European ‘kerm’, making it of the same root with Slavic ‘korm’, forage.

Finally, *zythos* is nowadays widely used in modern craft subculture. For example, Martin Cornell, a well-known journalist and book author, writes on the [Zythophile](#bibliography-zythophile) blog.

The simpliest and clearest situation is with the ‘pivo’ word that stands for ‘beer’ in Russian and other Slavic languages. It derives simply from the verb ‘piti’, to drink. From proto-Indo-European it came to the Greek (*pinein*, to drink) language; from Greek to Latin (*bibere*), from Latin to Spanish (*bebida*); from Latin to Old French (*pocion*), from Old French to English (*potion*, *poison*, and *potable*). Interestingly, another English word for something drinkable — ‘beverage’ — is likely derived from the same *bibere*, though direct connection remains unclear.

Germans enchriched our vocabulary with two more roots: *beer* and *ale*. Ethymology of both is quite foggy; the former probably meant mead or cider initialy (and therefore shares the same root with ‘bee’) as the Germans made no distinction between various sources of sugar for their beverages; or boringly derived from the very same *bibere*. As for *ale*, it influenced Scandinavian and Baltic languages (probably, independently from English) where its derivatives (*øl*, *olut*) are still in use.

Sumerians, as we mentioned, used a lot of different words for different kinds of beer. One of them, *sikaru*, made it into Semitic languages for denoting any alcoholic beverage, and in this meaning is used in the Bible. Later, it entered Old French and became *cidre*.

Finally, the Latin word for a starter, *fermentum*, transformed into scientific term ‘ferment’ and in this capacity entered dictionaries of the most of world languages.
