### The Beer Purity

##### Historical period: the 16th-17th centuries CE
##### Scene of action: Bavaria

Right after the beer trade had begun, early laws regulating it emerged. Two main issues are bothering authorities of all the brewing regions: ensuring the quality of the product and taxation. It's quite possible to take some specific areas and observe how the development of the brewing industry leads to the local legislation becoming more and more strict[ref:unger-middle-ages:69]().

The first laws that prescribed mandatory employing of some brewing techniques are known since the 12th century CE[ref:meussdoerffer-history:26]() and, generally speaking, were quite an ordinary thing for any brewing region. Still, one of them is outstanding: the Bavarian beer purity law of 1516, also known as *Reinheitsgebot* in German.

Fun Fact. ‘The Beer Purity Law of 1516’ is not about the beer purity, and was not adopted in 1516. However, it is widely known under that name. Such laws were in effect independently in Munich since 1487 and in the remaining parts of Bavaria since 1493. After Bavaria was united under Munich those two laws were compiled into one, and this edition of Apr 23, 1516 is called ‘Reinheitsgebot’.

Contrary to other cities' magistrates that were randomly adopting and then soon canceling their beer laws, the Bavarians demonstrated truly German obstinacy and love for order. Can you imagine that adopting the *Reinheitsgebot* country-wide was the condition of Bavaria joining the united Germany state in 1871[ref](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reinheitsgebot)?

Beer Myth. On the Internet, you might find the statements that the *Reinheitsgebot* was the first law regulating the quality of beer (which is not true) or even food in general (which is *absolutely* not true as those laws already existed in Ancient Rome). It is also incorrect to say that *Reinheitsgebot* is the oldest *acting* food industry law, as it was abolished by the European Court of Justice in 1987[ref:{"short":"Leonard, D.J.","extra":["10 Things You Might Not Know About the Reinheitsgebot (Beer) Purity Law of 1516","Beer Syndicate Blog"]}](https://beersyndicate.com/blog/tag/oldest-food-safety-law/) — so the Bavarian adherence to principles got rather diminished in those 100 years that passed since the Bismark times.

The law consists of several clauses that might be grouped into two categories:
  * price regulation (the law sets both the maximum retail price and the maximum allowed grist for resellers);
  * beer quality insurance.

Fun Fact. Many beer-regulating laws prescribed the maximum price just like the *Reinheitsgebot* did. So in case of poor harvest or monetary inflation, brewers were not able to raise the price. Instead, they lowered the quality bar by using less grain. That's why popular beer brands degraded quickly, and new ones were constantly emerging[ref:unger-middle-ages:187]().

In this law, the famous formula is stated: beer must be brewed with only three ingredients, namely water, barley, and hops. So nowadays in popular opinion, the *Reinheitsgebot* is something like a ‘Silver Bullet’ for ensuring the beer quality. Brewers often mention it in their commercials, and craft bars are frequently named ‘1516’.

In the reality, the importance of the formula was not about the ingredients it allowed, but rather ingredients it prohibited. First, *Reinheitsgebot* abolishes *gruit* and requires using hops only; second, it was meant to ensure the food security for the Bavarian burgers by prohibiting using non-forage crops for beer making, most importantly wheat.

#### Bavarian White

In the 15th century Bavaria a fashionable beer style occurred: the white (*weisse*) beer that was lighter than the Bavarian lagers because of some brewing tricks. One of the means of ‘whitewashing’ beer is using wheat (*Weizen*): wheat beer got a high white foamy head, and wheat itself might be used fully or partly unmalted. Approximately at the end of the 15th century these two words — *Weissbier* (e.g. ‘wheat beer’) and *Hefeweizen* (literally, ‘yeast wheat’) — started to mean exactly the same: wheat beer.

There is no consensus among scholars whether using wheat for brewing was a real food security problem, but the fact is undeniable: by introducing the ‘Beer Purity Law’, Wilhelm IV had legally outlawed using any grain but barley. However, Wilhelm's son, Albrecht V, made an exception to this rule in a form of a state monopoly — presumably under the pressure of consumers that were not willing to comply. Initially, the right to brew wheat beer had been granted to Count Degenburg, but after his death returned back to the Crown. The reigning Duke, Maximilian I, had quickly learned that this monopoly might have brought considerable profits as Bavarians liked wheat bear much and were eager to pay for the ‘forbidden fruit’, especially as it was the only kind of beer allowed to be brewed in summer. Maximilian founded an entire network of state breweries, one of which — former Weisse Brauhaus — has survived until today[ref:{"short":"Staudt, A. (2015)","extra":["Brewing Bavarian Weissbier – all you ever wanted to know","brau!magazin"]}](https://braumagazin.de/article/brewing-bavarian-weissbier-all-you-ever-wanted-to-know/).

Finally let us mention that beer made of wheat was produced for millennia, starting with Sumerians and Egyptians. 14th-century Hamburg was particularly praised for its wheat beer[ref:unger-middle-ages:185](). The Bavarians borrowed the technology from Bohemian brewers who had been producing wheat beers since the 12th-13th centuries CE[ref:{"source":{"alias":"oxford-companion","short":"The Oxford Companion to Beer (2012)","extra":["Edited by Garrett Oliver","ISBN 0195367138"]}}:"Weissbier"]().

#### How to Taste

Out of the ten oldest breweries in the world, several at once are located in Bavaria.
  * Weihenstephaner: the brewery at the Weihenstephan Abbey was first mentioned in 1040 (though some scholars believe that the corresponding document is a later forgery, we know for sure about cultivating hops in the monastery garden since at least 768 CE) and is generally believed to be the oldest continuously operated brewery in the world;
  * Weltenburger: mentioned in the previous chapter, this abbey brewery is ten years younger than Weihenstephaner;
  * Augustiner-Bräu: the brewery at the monastery of Augustine order, it was first mentioned in 1328, and was supplying beer for Bavarian dukes' households until the end of the 16th century;
  * two breweries that later formed the Spaten-Franziskaner Group, unsurprisingly that of Spaten (existed since 1397) and Franziskaner (since 1363); the former, however, does not produce wheat beers and is much better known for its lagers.

There are also two slightly younger breweries:
  * Staatliches Hofbräuhaus (the ‘Hofbräu’ trademark) — the ‘state court brewery’ founded by Wilhelm V himself in 1589;
  * G. Schneider & Sohn (the ‘Schneider Weisse’ trademark) — the venture of Georg Schneider's that had bought the oldest Munich brewery, Weisse Brauhaus, in 1872; *the* Brauhaus — one that was established by Maximilian I at the beginning of the 17th century to implement duke's monopoly on wheat beer.

There are reasonable doubts regarding the continuity of all these beer producers' traditions. For example, the Weltenburg abbey was disbanded in 1803 and reinstated only 40 years later. Still, the benchmark Bavarian wheat beers are produced by those companies, and the Weihenstephaner is considered to be the best.

As with *bock*, it's hard to tell if nowadays Bavarian *Hefeweizen* really resembles the historical *Weissbier* of the 16th century. Out of general considerations, the duke beer of that period should be closer to what we now call a ‘weizenbock’, e.g. relatively strong wheat dark. The reference *weizenbock*s are Mein Aventinus (AKA ‘Tap 6’) by Schneider Weisse and Vitus by the Weihenstephan brewery.