### Barrels and Bretts

##### Historical period: the 16th-17th centuries CE
##### Scene of action: England

After the Netherlands had switched to hopped beer, Britain remained the only bastion of the sweet malt beverage (that they called ‘ale’). At the beginning of the 15th century CE, England consumed an enormous quantity of that: a gallon of ale per day (approx. 4.5 liters) was a golden standard for provisioning soldiers, servants, monks, and even hospital inmates[ref:bennett-brewsters:17]().

Quite detailed descriptions of British ale technology survived; importantly, they prescribe no boiling of wort, so ale was doomed to spoil very quickly. Furthermore, sometimes even gruit was not included in the recipe, which made the resulting product even less stable. A 1542 instruction specifically points out that ale should not be kept for more than five days[ref:hornsey-history:324](). Under those conditions, wort was not allowed to ferment fully: attenuation (e.g. the share of soluble compounds that yeasts had consumed) was low. Ale was much more thick and viscous than we are accustomed to nowadays. If required to make a beer that might be kept longer, brewers had to increase alcohol content and spend a ridiculous amount of grain.

Fun Fact. One of the most prized kinds of ales in the 16th-century England was a replica of a German *mumme* (see the ‘Word on Hops’ chapter) — with British accent, as some *mumme* ingredients were not growing in British isles.

Probably, that instability of ale (and therefore a lack of major producers) was one of the reasons why England resisted hops for more than 200 years. Archeologists found traces of hops in fossils dated all the way down to the 10th century CE, and the first documents mentioning hopped beer are known since the 14th century CE. However, despite technological advancements, hops started to play a significant role in brewing only in the 16th century CE.

Initially, hopped beer was brewed by immigrants (German, Dutch, and Flemish ones) to be consumed by themselves, and, ironically, to be sold to the Netherlands[ref:bennett-brewsters:80](). Englishmen even borrowed the word to denote the ‘foreign’ beverage: *bier*, which later became ‘beer’. That led to a paradoxical situation of two independent guilds — beer makers and ale makers — existing simultaneously and quite actively fighting each other[ref:hornsey-history:323]().

Beer Myth. Using the different words for beer and ale resulted in a common misconception, shared by many scholars, starting with the witnesses of the epoch and ending with the authors of comprehensive monographs written in the 21st century — the one that states hops were prohibited in the 16th-century England. That's not true: it was prohibited to brew *ale* with hops, but it was never prohibited to make *beer* with them. This legend was first voiced by Thomas Fuller in 1662, and since then it continues traveling from one book to another. Also, it is sometimes stated that Henry VI banished hops as a ‘pernicious and wicked weed’: this false quote originates in the same book of Fuller's[ref:zythophile:"Myth 2: Hops were forbidden by Henry VI"](https://zythophile.co.uk/false-ale-quotes/myth-two-hops-were-forbidden-by-henry-vi/).

Foreigners were seemingly losing this war; however, the sheer historical inevitability forced English monarchs into supporting ‘alien’ producers. England was struggling to become a naval power, and that was impossible without beer (and not just any beer, but that one of certain quality: it must have had enough shelf life to survive several months in a voyage, and ideally be cheap). In the 15th-16th century CE, beer was a norm of life for European sailors being literally consumed instead of water. Ships were supplied with beer at the rate of 3 to 5 liters per a crewman per day universally throughout all the northern parts of Europe, from Netherlands and Hans to Russian Empire under Peter the Great[ref:{"source":{"alias":"durov-peter-beer","short":"Дуров, И.Г. (2014)","extra":["Производство и обеспечение пивом кораблей Балтийского флота при Петре Великом","Военно-исторический журнал"],"href":"http://history.milportal.ru/proizvodstvo-i-obespechenie-pivom-korablej-baltijskogo-flota-pri-petre-velikom/"}}](). English monarchs were shipping beer to their overseas garrisons since the 15th centuryе[ref:{"source":{"alias":"change-is-brewing","short":"Krenzke, J.R. (2014)","extra":["Change Is Brewing: The Industrialization of the London Beer-Brewing Trade, 1400-1750","Dissertations. 1276"],"href":"https://ecommons.luc.edu/luc_diss/1276/"}}:39](), and at the end of the 16th century Samuel Pepys, the Secretary of the Admiralty, secured a one-gallon daily ration of beer for sailors[ref:meussdoerffer-history:22]().

The other reason why hopped beer was slowly but steadily advancing was the ability to brew stronger beverages. Because of low attenuation, English ale likely contained not more than 2.5% ABV; the elite ‘double’ (e.g. brewed with a double measure of grain) kinds of ale reached maybe 5%. Hopped ‘double’ beer might be 8-10%, and even stronger versions (so-called ‘doble-doble’, e.g. the ‘double-double’), up to 15%. In the 16th century, the English gentry was literally hunting for stronger beers, as they were a substitute for expensive imported wine and brandy. Edward VI, Mary I, and Elizabeth I were in turns fighting against the ‘doble-doble’ but had not succeeded, apparently[ref:{"source":{"alias":"amber-gold-black","short":"Cornell, M. (2010)","extra":["Amber, Gold & Black. The History of Britain’s Great Beers","ISBN 9780752475943"]}}:157-158]().

Fun Fact. The final victory of beer over ale happened in 1710, with the Parliament banned hop substitutes (of course, for taxation reasons)[ref:zythophile:"A short history of hops"](https://zythophile.co.uk/2009/11/20/a-short-history-of-hops/). The language changed as well: starting from the 17th century, the words ‘ale’ and ‘beer’ began meaning slightly and strongly hopped beer respectively. Paradoxically, the legal distinction between beer and ale persisted: for example, beer was prescripted to be sold in 36-gallon barrels, while ale was to be sold in the 32-gallon ones[ref:amber-gold-black:28]().

The beer production had been constantly increasing all over the 17th century, reaching its peak in 1691: London had brewed more than 2 million barrels, e.g. approximately 300 million liters, having a population of 600 thousand — that's five liters of beer per day per each inhabitant, including children.

The technology advancement impacted English beer bars (*alehouses*, taverns, or since the 17th century ‘pubs’ — short for a ‘public house’): if ale was to be sold short after it's brewed, beer might be kept for a prolonged time, so new terms occurred: ‘mild ale’ or ‘running ale’ for fresh beer, and ‘keeping ale’ or ‘stale ale’ for aged beer — or rather aged beer actually came into being as a mass product. (Unhopped ales could be kept for a prolonged time as well, but only the strongest and most expensive ones[ref:change-is-brewing:22]()).

While producing those keeping ales, English brewers had created and developed a new technology (initially by accident, presumably). Beer stored in a barrel for a long time continued to slowly ferment: barrel planks gave shelter to yeasts, initially being inoculated by accident, and later simply absorbing remains of the previous brew. ‘Wild’ yeasts, unlike the baker's and the lager ones, are much more resilient (it was impossible to purge them from barrels) and are capable of fermenting under little oxygen supply, breaking down complex sugars (maltodextrins) that are present in abundance in thick wort and normally are not consumed by regular baker's yeasts — but they did it very slowly, for many months.

So, finally, after a year or two, the beverage in the barrel will be quite different compared to the initial one. First, beer loses its carbonation. Second, it becomes stronger in alcohol content and extremely dry: during the prolonged keeping time yeasts will break down all fermentable sugars. Third, the look and the taste change: beer becomes more clean and clear, the hop bitterness ceases, and the characteristical acidness (or even tartness) is added up alongside the taste of the barrel itself. As a result, tavern keepers got new work to do: mixing up a high-quality but stale aged ale with a fresh one to get some better-tasting beer to sell.

