### Author's Note

The history of beer and brewing was always a practical study for me. I was always keen to try something new, not just to try but also learn from it. How was this beverage produced and why does it taste like this? Gradually, I became interested in studying beer history and soon found that brewing was one of the hottest, even intriguing, topics of historical dialogue.

For many centuries in parts of Northern Europe, beer was if not the primary economic driver then it was at least second — a fact that both Medieval chroniclers and contemporary scholars turn a blind eye to. Up until the 1980's, researchers were largely interested in the history of alcohol only in the context of consumption effects on personal and public health[ref:{"source":{"alias":"dietler-alcohol","short":"Dietler, M. (2006)","extra":\["Alcohol: Anthropological/Archaeological Perspectives","Annual Review of Anthropology, 2006. 35:229–49:230"\],"href":"https://www.academia.edu/272118/Alcohol_Anthropological_Archaeological_Perspectives"}}:230](). Yet as we all well know, alcohol, this ‘social lubricant’, plays a much greater role in society. Gradually, this fact reached academic circles. In the case of beer, it happened even later at the beginning of the 21st century. It turns out that beer, an ordinary and democratic beverage, allows us to poke our noses into the most interesting and least documented part of the past; the daily experiences and occupations of common folk.

Making one's way through beer history is incredibly fascinating and equally challenging. Eyewitnesses of the distant past didn't concern themselves about writing down such obvious and mundane things as beer brewing; if in fact they were literate at all. Focusing on the efforts of our brewing forebears, modern science has clarified  many of the mysteries over the last 100+ years. Craft beer brewers have recreated abundant examples of *historical* beer styles for everyone to taste. But our knowledge is arguably still miserably sparse regarding key aspects and events, even quite novel ones.

While writing this book I hadn't considered the goal of compiling some short "History of Beer." First, it seemed impossible and second, I'm no scholar but a beer enthusiast. My primary goal, dear reader, it to *acquaint* you with good beer and weave an interesting tale along the way. Let us begin!

#### An Important Remark

This book is written in a format of lecture-tasting. In each chapter, we're proposing to try a specific kind of beer matching the historical period described. Full description of how to read classifications and where to learn about suitable beer styles are found in the Appendix.
