### What is Beer

Before starting our dive into the history of beer, we need to define what “beer” is. Natural alcoholic beverages are a result of the biochemical process of alcoholic fermentation: various microorganisms (primarily yeasts, but not only them) are capable to extract carbohydrates (first of all, sugars) from an aqueous solution and break them down, producing ethyl alcohol and carbon dioxide, as well as some other organic compounds. Carbon dioxide makes the resulting drink sparkling; ethyl alcohol, interesting to humans.

Depending on what raw materials were used and what kind of sugar was fermented, the resulting beverages are called differently:
  * if the raw material was grapes (or other fruit), juice of which contains a large amount of glucose, then the result of fermentation is called wine;
  * if the raw material was apple (or pear) juice containing glucose and malic acid, then we get cider (or perry);
  * if milk sugar lactose was fermented, then we get kumis;
  * if we took honey rich in fructose saccharide as raw material, we get mead.

Fun Fact. Sugar cane juice, which consists mostly of sucrose dissolved in water, also quite fits for manufacturing of low-alcohol beverages, but humanity started to cultivate it for this purpose quite recently. At that moment the distillation technology was already known, and just strong drinks were produced, rum and cachaça for instance. The product of natural, without the use of distillation, fermentation of sugar cane is known in some countries under the name “guarapo,” being in very limited demand.

Finally, if sugars extracted from cereals were used for fermentation (first of all, we are talking about the disaccharide maltose), then the resulting low-alcohol drink is called “beer.” The grain of many cultivated plants, such as wheat, barley, maize, rice, rye, oats, millet, buckwheat, and others is suitable for beer production. Thus, such drinks made from cereals as Russian kvass, Finnish sahti, and traditional Japanese sake should also be considered “beer.”

Our distant ancestors, presumably, discovered the fermentation process by accident: it was enough to leave the water with grain in the open air for the wind to inoculate it with wild yeast. A few days at the right temperature — and you will get a refreshing low-alcohol drink.

The age of the known remains of fermented sugars is steadily moving further into the past. At the moment, the oldest such finding dates back to about the eleventh millennium BCE.[ref:{"short":"Liu, L., Wang J., Rosenberg, D., Zhao, H., Lengyel, G., Nadel D. (2018)","extra":["Fermented beverage and food storage in 13,000 y-old stone mortars at Raqefet Cave, Israel: Investigating Natufian ritual feasting","Journal of Archaeological Science: Reports. Volume 21, October 2018, Pages 783-793"]}](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S2352409X18303468) Thus, beer and mammoths were there at the same time for at least nine thousand years! Some researchers believe that beer may be older than bread: brewing is easier than baking. But we would disagree with them, for two reasons.

First, cereals themselves contain little to no low-molecular carbohydrates: the main component of grain is starch. To get maltose or glucose out of it, you need to somehow activate the processes of converting starches into saccharides. For example, you can chew rice: the enzymes in saliva help to start the process of converting starch into glucose. This is how traditional Japanese sake *kuchikamizake* is prepared (not to be confused with modern sake, the production technology of which we will explain in the chapter “At the dawn of civilization”). If you have wondered why the heroine of the “Your Name” movie is chewing rice, that's it: she is producing traditional sake.

It is believed that the *kuchikamizake* technology (which was used not only by the Japanese but also by South American Indians, for example) is about 2.5 thousand years old (although we have not seen credible studies on this topic). Therefore the oldest beer was prepared somehow differently, and some other mechanism was employed to “activate” the cereals. For example, bread was baked or *malt* was prepared. The latter is a product of controlled sprouting: during the germination of grain, enzymes are produced. These chemical compounds are capable of converting starches into maltose under the right conditions, and such grain becomes suitable for the production of a beverage, which we call “beer.”

Another problem of beer production is the necessity to somehow introduce yeast into the solution. You can, of course, rely on sheer luck, but this method is poorly applicable for large-scale production. In order for fermentation to begin, a “starter culture” is needed. It can be fruits (such as grapes or dates), on the surface of which yeast lives in the wild, baked bread, or yeast sediment from a previous cooking.

Based on this, we strongly doubt that ancient beer was produced by accident: “accidental” beer should have been obtained too rarely and being too weak, unlike, for example, fermented milk or fruit juices. Brewing was exactly a *technology*, one of the first mastered by mankind.[ref:{"source":{"alias":"meussdoerffer-history","short":"Meussdoerffer, F. G. (2009)","extra":\["A Comprehensive History of Beer Brewing","Handbook of Brewing: Processes, Technology, Markets. Edited by H. M. Eßlinger (2009). ISBN 9783527316748"\],"href":"https://www.academia.edu/4421107/1_A_Comprehensive_History_of_Beer_Brewing_1"}}:4]()